===== PAGE 1 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 2 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 3 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 4 / 300 =====

THE

BHAGAVAD-GITA;

A DISCOURSE BETWEEN KRISHNA AND ARJUNA
ON DIVINE MATTERS. -

A SANSKRIT PHILOSOPHICAL POEM:

‘TRANSLATED,
WITH COPIOUS NOTES, AN INTRODUCTION ON SANSKRIT PHILOSOPHY, AND

OTHER MATTER:

* * J. COCKBURN THOMSON,

MIMBER OF THE ASIATIC SOCIETY OF FRANCE; AND OF THE ANTIQUAMIAN SOCIETY OF NORMANDY,

HERTFORD:

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY STEPHEN AUSTIN, FORE STREET,
BOOKSELLER TO THE BAST INDIA COLLEGE.

“moeery,


===== PAGE 5 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 6 / 300 =====

0

HORACE HAYMAN WILSON, 1.4, PRS,

DODEN PROPRSGOR OF SANSKAIT IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,
PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY,
ETC, BTC,

TO WHOM

EUROPE: OWES 80 MUCH OF HER KNOWLEDGE OF INDIA, INDIA 80 MUCH

OF THE ESTEEM OF EUROPE;

AND WHOSE INDEFATIGABLE LABOURS AND RARE ABILITIES HAYE THROWN A

BRIGHT LIGHT OVER THE MYSTERIES OF THE BAST;

THIS HUMBLE ATTEMPT 70 FOLLOW IN HIS FOOTSTEPS
’ I§ INSCRIBED,

A® A MARK OF ADMIRATION FOR HIS TALENTS AND GRATITUDE FOR HIS

FRIENDSHIP ;
BY HIS PUPIL,

THE TRANSLATOR.


===== PAGE 7 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 8 / 300 =====

CONTENTS.

PAGE
PREFACE ix
INTRODUCTION :—
Panr I.—On the Origin of Philosophical Ideas in India... xxv
»  1L.—On the Schools of Indian Philosophy xlv
yy TII.—The Sankhya System . Isvi
»  IV.—The Yoga, of Patanjali ..... xevii
»» V.—The Philosophy of the Bhagavad-Giti evi
Remarks on the Bhagavad-Git .. exxxii
TRANSLATION :—
Cuartern —_-.—The Despondency of Arjuna .. 1
» TI.—Application to the Sinkhya Doctrine 9
’ in II].—Devotion through Action .... 21
» IV.—Devotion through Spiritual Knowledge 29
“ YV.—Devotion by means of the Renunciation of Actions .. 37
o VI.—Devotion by means of Self-Restraint 43
. a VII.—Devotion through Spiritual Discernment 50
VILII.—Devotion to the Indivisible Supreme Spirit 56
» _ 1X.—Devotion by moans of Kingly Knowledge and Kingly
Mystory 62
” X.—Devotion to the Divine Virtues 68
” XI.—The Vision of the Universal Form 15
" XII.—Devotion through Worship... 84
v  XI11—Devotion in counection with the Kshetra and the
Kshetrajna 87
@ —,,  XIV.—Devotion in connection with the Three Qualities 95
” XV.—Devotion by the Attainment to the Highest Person... 100

» « XVI.—Devotion in regard to the Lot of the Devas and that

of the Asuras .....
»  XVII—Devotion as regards the three Kinds of Faith
» XVIII.—Devotion as Regards Emancipation and Renunciation

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES... ses esse

10
116



===== PAGE 9 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 10 / 300 =====

PREFACE.

TuerE are many portions of Sacred Writ which, while it
would be presumptuous to refuse their literal acceptation,
forcibly prompt an allegorical construction, serving at once
as a lesson and a prophecy. Such is the narrative of the
building of the Tower of Babel. When the world, re-
covered from all but entire destruction, rose fresh in all
its worldliness, Godless and independent, exulting in the
diseovery of the strength of its physical, and the un-
botnded vastness of its mental powers, man first learnt
“the truth that union is the secret of all strength, and that
by it, though a mere unit in creation, he might attain
a super-human position. Nor was ever confusion more
complete or more wonderful than the miracle which
crushed his efforts and lowered his proud schemes to the
dust.

Yet since that moment man has ever been building
another and a greater tower which, none the Tess, has
Heaven for sits object. Science and enlightenment are


===== PAGE 11 / 300 =====

x BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

ever rising brick by brick, layer by layer, story by story,
towards the level of super-human knowledge; and th
great obstacle which put a stop to the erection of the
material Babel—the confusion of tongues—still exists to
impede that of the Tower of Knowledge, and still consti-
tutes the chief hindrance to man’s united action and
united strength,

But if the obstacle exist, the means of surmounting it
have been granted us. We have never been debarred
from acquiring another language than our own; and if
the scientific man of each country be considered the maker
of the bricks, the linguist may, at least, claim to be that
no less useful workman who visits the kiln of knowledge
in every land and brings together the materials for the
great work.

The study of tongues, then, is not to be slighted.
Through a nation’s language alone can its character, ag
well as its labours after truth, be really known; and the
study of nations is the study of mankind in its most
liberal form.

We cannot deny that the present age has felt this to
be the case more than any that has gone before it, frhen
we see in every country throughout Europe. that the
Classics of foreign languages constitute the first food ad-
ministered to the young mind. But what has been
granted to Greck and Latin has been refused to Sanskrit


===== PAGE 12 / 300 =====

PREFACE. xL

literature, which, if it offer more difficulties and impedi-
jaents in its approach than others, indisputably possesses
as rich, as varied, and as valuable a treasure as any that
can be ranked among the dead. Yet it has found many
zealous opponents among the learned of the west, and
many delusive arguments have been brought against it.
It has been called useless, as well for practical as scientific
purposes,

Let us first consider the former accusation,—its useless-
ness to those whom we send from our little island to be
the governors and dispensers of justice over a hundred
and sixty millions of inhabitants, and a continent almost
as vast as that of Europe itself. And here it is argued,
that because Sanskrit is the parent of the many dialects
spoken in India, it is not on that account the more use-
ful’ to those who must employ them. It would be no
more absurd, it is urged, to oblige every Englishman
holding an appointment in Malta or the Ionian Islands to
pass an examination in Homer or Virgil, because Greek
and Latin are the sources of the vernaculars there spoken.
But the case is very different with the Indian Peninsula.
Thé modern Greek and Italian races differ far more from
the Gree and the Roman of old than even their altered
languages ;—their character, their religion, their institu-
tions, their modes of expression even, are completely
changed, and the heroes of Thucydides and Livy would


===== PAGE 13 / 300 =====

xu BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

come among them as utter strangers. Not so the Hindi.
His religion, his institutions, his character, aye, even his,
mode of thought, is the same now as in the time of Kéli-
d&sa, the dramatist; or, still more, in that of the poets,
Vyésa and Valmiki! If there be any change at all, it is
only that of day to night. Gross superstition and awful
fatalism now reign where thought and the search for truth
have existed before,—the pedantic Pandit has replaced
the learned Br&hman, who was poet and philosopher, as-
tronomer and theologian alike; and an age of ruminating
lethargy has succeeded to one of action and invention.
But the faults of the one have proceeded in a natural
course from the uncorrected errors of the other; and these
errors should be studied if we would understand and leam
to deal with the character of which they are the origin,
The European who has not studied the Aryan® will never
comprehend the Hindu. .

Again, in a scientific point of view, Sanskrit, as a lan-

.

guage, must take a very high place, and claim a very con-

1 Kolidtsa flourished at the Court of VikramAditya, 66 years before Christ.
‘Vyése, the supposed author of the Mahabhirata, etc., and Valmiki, that of the
Rémbyan, lived soveal conturies earlier, though the exact dats cannot be fixed
with any certainty.

2 "The name generally given to the people who wed the Sanskrit language in
contradistinction to the modern inhabitants of India, I say weed, since there
is reson to live tat fiom a very remote period the people ofthe Penineula
have spoken one or more impure dialects.


===== PAGE 14 / 300 =====

PREFACE. xu

siderable amount of usefulness. The etymologist, the
philologian, the ethnologist, and even the historian, cannot
perfect their investigations without it,—parent, as it is,
of almost every European, and of many Asiatic languages.
Among the literatures, also, of bygone ages, we must, at
least, accord to that of India a third place in extent and
value. If Greece and Rome can boast of lyric and dra-
matic poets, whom we may still use as models of style,
or of Philosophers whose theories have not yet ceased to
exert some influence, surely ancient India will be able to
do as much, when rightly and generally understood; and
I shall not have succeeded in the least of my objects, if
the pages of the following Introduction do not prove my
osition to the reader.

But I will not now enter into details. I will content
myself with one assertion, which future ages and future
Indianists will triumph in proving. Of all the accusations
brought against Sanskrit literature, none appears so incon-
trovertible as that it possesses no history. This I deny.
The late M. Burnouf—whom all Oriental scholars must
honour as one of the fathers of the study of the East in
Europe—was wont to say, that when rightly understood
and duly compared, every work in Sanskrit would supply
some historical material to fill up the gap which undoubtedly
seems to exist; and that a history of the Aryan nation
might eventually be traced with as much accuracy as that


===== PAGE 15 / 300 =====

xiv BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

of any race which has not deigned to chronicle its own
existence, .

Whence, then, these mistaken notions of Sanskrit litera-
ture? Whence these impediments in the way of ita study ;
these mists of doubt and delusion which surround itP
We answer that the study of Sanskrit is still in its cradle;
and we are forced, at the same time, to confess that it has
been but indifferently nursed even by its most zealous
students. It is now more than a hundred years since
Father Pons, a French missionary, wrote a letter, dated
Karikal, the 23rd of November, 1740, on the religion,
philosophy, and literature of the Hindus; yet it was only
in 1852 that a first attempt was made at Berlin, by
Professor Weber,? in the form of lectures, to arrange and
consolidate all that has been agglomerated on the subject
of the literature of Hinddstén; and, great as is the praise
due to his diligence and research in so difficult ‘a task,
we cannot but regret that even this undertaking should
have been carried out in a manner to make it useless to
any but scholars,

‘We must yield a full palm of praise to the labours of
all the founders of this study in Europe,—men who have
devoted their lives to the unravelling of the mysteries of
the East. Great names are not wanting among the dead

1 See “Mémoires des Indes” [in “Lettres édiflantes””], vol. xiy. 1781.
? Bee “ Vorlosungen ueber die Indische Literatur-geschichte.” Berlin, 1862,
‘ ‘



===== PAGE 16 / 300 =====

PREFACE, xv

and the living to call forth the admiration of their followers
y—Jones, Wilkins, Colebrooke, Wilson, Johnson, Williams,
and many others among ourselves; Schlegel, Lassen, and
Windischmann, in Germany; Chézy, Burnouf, Langlois,
and Deslongchamps, in France; but we cannot refrain from
regretting that all, or nearly all, these distinguished men
should have looked on their pursuits as peculiar and exclu-
sive, and retained their greatest discoveries for the small
chosen circle of Orientalists ;—in short, that the external
and less laborious world has as yet derived little benefit
from them.

Though we may regret, we cannot, however, blame.
Every study, be it of languages or of science, passes through
the same tedious course. A few eccentric minds, fired with
a burning thirst for knowledge, have set out with, slight
materials on an unbeaten track of discovery. Their followers

. have modified and corrected the work of their masters, and
have worked alike in their own confined sphere.

But a period arrives in every study, when the labours of
all its scholars must be reduced to one united and harmo-
nious whole; when the bricks that one has baked, the
morter another has mixed, and the beams which a third has
cut, must be brought together and arranged by the hand
of the builder, in the form of another story added to the
great Tower of Knowledge which may reach to the skies.

Such a period, it seems to me, has now arrived for the


===== PAGE 17 / 300 =====

xvi BHAGAVAD-GITA.

study of the Indian Peninsula and its sacred tongue. Much
has been written, much hazarded, much even proved on
particular branches and single topics; and a demand is
now made for some one who, content to work on the found-
ation laid by others, will collect the broad features that
reign through all and present them to the general reader.
In such a capacity I now volunteer ; and if I be found, on
test, to succeed but indifferently, some allowance may, I
trust, be made for me, in the novelty and difficulty of the
task.

The method I have adopted is simple, and makes its
results available at the same time for the student and the
general reader. It is that of giving an easy but literal
translation of the best Sanskrit works, accompanied by
copious explanatory notes, and preceded by such an intro-
duction on the subject-matter of the work, as shall make
the translation intelligible and palatable to all who may ,
read it, and spare the student the labour of searching
among remote and scattered heaps for the information he
requires.

If the choice of a philosophical work, with which to
commence, should seem strange to some, I may be allowed
to defend it in a few words. .

In the first place, I must remind the objector that the
choice is far from being unlimited. There are very fow
works in all the mass of Sanskrit prose and Yerse com-


===== PAGE 18 / 300 =====

PREFACE. xv

positions which have not been already sufficiently treated
dy scholars of acknowledged authority, as to enable me to
dispense with many tedious preliminaries; and still fewer,
the style and language of which is sufficiently simple for
the student who is not far advanced. Again, of all the
subjects treated in Indian literature, few seem to me 50
well adapted to the taste of the general reader as that of
philosophy. While he would shrink from an investigation
of their religious ideas, through the thick maze of com-
plicated mythology and symbolism which envelopes them,
he will gladly inquire what the Hindi mind has been
capable of producing in the clearer field of theoretical in-
vestigation. While its Science might interest those only
who had pursued the same subjects with European and
modern materials, its Philosophy seems to me to offer
something of interest to every thinking mind, Their
Drama, their Poetry, their Didactic Literature, were mostly
devoid of the indispensable requisites; and the only other
work which was fully suited to the same object was the
well-known collection of instructive fables called Hitopa-
desha. When for a moment I hesitated between this and
the present work, I was reminded that the ground of the
former ewas already occupied by the excellent English
and German translations of Professors Johnson and Max
Miiller. Lastly, the Bhagavad-Gité itself offers many ad-
vantages. “Belonging to that school of Sanskrit philosophy


===== PAGE 19 / 300 =====

xviii BHAGAVAD-GiTA,

which I think we must regard as the first upward flight
of the Hindi mind, shackled hitherto by the trammels of
superstition, and weighed down by the arrogant oppression
of an all-powerful hierarchy, it adds to its theories the
first ideas of that strange system which converted the
multitudes of a vast region into the most rigid ascetics,
and which reigns gloomily over the minds of so large a
portion of its population. In this respect it presents
a strange and complete picture of the Hindi character,
and is therefore not without general interest.

In the Introduction which follows will be found an ac-
count of the poem entitled the Bhagavad-Gité and of its
subject-matter. It is here scarcely necessary to state more
than ‘that it is a philosophical poem,—not merely phil»
sophical theories in Sanskrit verse,—but really a poem in
the fullest acceptation of the word. It is an episode
inserted in the great Sanskrit Epic called Mahébhérata—
the Iliad of India,—which, if it be not equal to the great
Epic of the West in the brilliancy and variety of its
colouring, and the music of its style, is not inferior to it
in that masculine power which only rude uncivilized
nations can produce. Its philosophy has been ranked
under that most ancient school—the S4nkhya--which
claims Kapila as its founder ; and under that branch of
it, the Yoga, which is ascribed to another half-fabulous
Bréhmap, Patanjali. What those systems are, and how


===== PAGE 20 / 300 =====

PREFACE, xix

far it is justly ranked with them, is the subject of the
ensuing Introduction. ;

I must now speak of the forms in which the Bhagavad-
Gité has been already made public. It was first brought
to light in that of a translation by the learned Oriental
scholar, Sir Charles Wilkins, in the year 1785, and the
translation was published in French by M. Parraud in
Paris in 1787. Of the original translation we cannot
speak with entire satisfaction. Doubtless, as a first at-
tempt, and with the slight knowledge of Hindi philosophy
then at hand, it is praiseworthy; but it is defective in
being too Jittle translated. All words that present the
slightest difficulty of rendering into English are left un-
tfanslated, and nothing but a short and barely sufficient
note added to explain them. In the French version this
is ‘hot amended, and the meaning of Wilkins is rendered
srather more obscure than clearer. ‘The first edition of the
Sanskrit Text of the Bhagavad-Git4 was published in Cal-
cutta in 1808, edited by the Brahman Bébi-réma—editor,
before and since, of many other standard Sanskrit worke—
and at the suggestion of the illustrious Colebrooke. The
edition most generally used is that of the celebrated
August *Wilhelm von Schlegel, published, with a very
literal Latin translation and notes, at Bonn, in the year
1823; while, for a greatly improved and augmented
edition, we have to thank his no less celebrated pupil


===== PAGE 21 / 300 =====

xx BHAGAVAD-GITA.

Christian Lassen, who reproduced it at the same place in
1846. Of the Latin translation which accompanies these
editions, and which is used and appreciated by all Orien-
talists, I need only now say that it cannot be too highly
praised: though perhaps it is to be regretted that in their
zeal to correct the error into which their predecessor had
fallen, both master and pupil have gone too far, and at-
tempted to translate much that had better have been left
alone. Lastly, we must name with the highest eulogy a
most able Greek translation prepared at Benares by the
learned Greek Orientalist, Demetrios Galanos, with the
assistance of the Bréhman Kandadarsa, and printed at
Athens, with an introduction by M. Typaldus, in 1846.
This, it will be seen, is by far the best translation whith
exists, while the notes which accompany it are in every
respect invaluable. But I cannot conclude this notice
without referring, as I do with the greatest pleasure, “to.
a French translation, prepared some years past by one
whose name has been already raised high in the esteem
of the scholastic world by his essays on the Sénkhya and
Nyéya systems of Hindu philosophy, M. Barthélemy | 8t.
Hilaire. This able production has been unfortunately pre-
vented from appearing at present, but with thet frank
and amiable generosity by which he is distinguished, its
author has laid the manuscript entirely at my disposi-
tion. It is an excellent free translation, following in


===== PAGE 22 / 300 =====

PREFACE. XXL

most essential points that of Schlegel and Lassen, but
preferable to it from its superior clearness and explicit-
ness.

Of these four translations the only one available to the
general English reader was that of Wilkins, and even
were this still easily obtainable, it would be far from giving
a clear idea of the work in question, and still less_of its
philosophy. The work of Schlegel and Lassen contains
no account whatever of the philosophical ideas of the
Bhagavad-Gité, nor is any attempt made in their notes to
explain the more obscure passages; while I think it will
be admitted that the student who knows little of Sanskrit
philosophy, will often be as much puzzled to divine the
meaning of the Latin translation, as of the original Sans-
krit text. Lastly, the excellent work of M. Galanos is in
Gteek, which would deter many from its perusal.

‘I caiinot pretend that I have departed very materially
from any of these translations in the more essential points ;
it will be seen later in what details I may differ from each,
and on what points I may claim the right of a fresh
version. Yet it is not so much, be it well understood,
the’ details of my translation which I seek to thrust before
the public, but the popular form with which I have at-
tempted to invest it. The Introduction presents a general
view of the rise of philosophical ideas in India, and of
the principal schools into which they distributed themselves.


===== PAGE 23 / 300 =====

xxl BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

It then particularizes the Sénkhya system, and the Yoga
and Karmayoga branches of it, and proceeds to a minute
investigation of the doctrines contained in our poem.
Lastly, it presents a Critical and Historical Review of the
whole work. In the Translation itself, I have attempted
to preserve, if not the order of the words, at least that
of the sense of the original, and while making it so
literal that the beginner may employ it as a key to the
text, have endeavoured to render it sufficiently English
for the general reader not to be turned back by its pecu-
liarities. The Notes have been placed at the foot of each
page, that the sense of every obscure word or passage may
be grasped at once, and long explanations are given
wherever they are required. Lastly, an Index of Proper
Names contains all that I have been able to gather on
the subject, and is much more extended than that ‘of

The task has not been an easy one, and I leave it to
the reader to judge if I have performed it suitably. I
can only say that it was not undertaken without the coun-
tenance of one whom I am proud to be able to call my
friend and preceptor, and who is justly considered as the
firat of living Orientalists, Horace Hayman Wilgon, and
with that I courageously face criticism.

I cannot refrain, ere I conclude, from paying some
slight tribute to the liberality of those among whom I


===== PAGE 24 / 300 =====

PREFACE, Xx

write this, During the last year I have continually en-
joyed the friendship and assistance of some of the most
illustrious savans of France; and, indeed, to their gene-
rosity and aid it is owing that I have been enabled to
complete the attempt which I now submit to the public,

J. COCKBURN THOMSON.
Paris, 1855. -


===== PAGE 25 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 26 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION.

ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.

PART I.

ON THE ORIGIN OF PHILOSOPHICAL IDEAS IN INDIA.

Wuen we strive to furnish a definition of the meaning of
the word “Philosophy,” we are startled at the difficulty of
the task. We are met by one of those many abstract ideas
which cannot be handled, or reduced within the narrow
circle which a definition requires; one of those vague ex-
pansive conceptions which belong only to a high state of
civilization, and which if they existed at all in the mind of
the past did so as mysteries only, and found no words by
means of which they might be vulgarized for the use of a
licentious world. The word ‘philosophy’ has a far narrower
and’ bettér defined meaning in the distant past, in the rude
methodical school-days of mankind, than in the present age.
And this meaning is sufficiently demonstrated in its very
etymology, to which we are compelled to have recourse.
There are few countries, among all that can boast a
literature, where philosophy has developed itself clearly, in-
dependently, and, so to speak, spontaneously ; and demanded
for ifeelf 2 name. Perhaps Greece and India may be con-
sidered as the only two such, and the philosophies of other
nations may be looked upon, either os the offspring of these,
or as a species of religious mysticism. Under the former we
may rank all the modern European schools: under the latter
the great sygtems of China, Persia, Syria, and Egypt. In


===== PAGE 27 / 300 =====

XXV1 BHAGAVAD-GITA,

India and Greece, then, the names for philosophy have the
same meaning—the desire for knowledge’ —¢vAocog/a and
Jiindsd; and in them we find a true definition of its origin
and original form. It is the dawning consciousness of the
power of the intellect, which, blushing at its ignorance and
its blind belief, urges the search after hidden and unknown
truth through the immediate channels of internal investiga-
tion, rather than the surer but more tedious path of estab-
lished science.

The birth of Philosophy is an era in the annals of every
people; and the enquiry as to the causes of its origin is
inseparable from the investigation of their religious and
social history. Thus the history of most nations is divisible
into three great periods, which serve alike for their religious
and social peculiarities; Ist. The Age of Barbarism; 2nd,
The Age of Mysticism; 38rd. The Age of Investigation. Let
us examine these briefly.

1st. The Age of Barbarism. When man went forth from
Ararat and spread himself over the face of the earth, liftle
was left him but instinct and conscience. Instinct prompted
self-preservation, and this again suggested invention. Hence
the origin of uéeful arts. According to the nature of the
climate, and the soil to which he wandered, he became hus-
bandman or shepherd. Choice would send him to the pleasant
district which could be tilled, necessity drive him to the
mountain, or the wild plain, where cattle would yield him
equal support. But in either case he was dependent on
nature. If a husbandman, earth afforded him grain, which
he laid in her bosom, and left, as it were, to her to foster;
while, when the grain sprung up, sun, rain, and air, &s he
soon discovered, were necessary for its growth. If a herds-
man, his flock no less required water to drink and tvarmth to
cheer them; and the air or wind could counteract the ex-
cesses of both, could cool the heat of the one, and dry the
land when deluged by the other. Thus he felt his dependence.


===== PAGE 28 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xxvii

Sun, wind, and rain, were necessary for his happiness, and
even for his support; but they were above his control, and
seemed to favour him at their own will. He felt that they
were his superiors, and their spontaneous action suggested
the idea of their personality. The elements and the common
phenomena were deified. But how to propitiate them, how
to make the clouds rain, the sun shine, the wind blow, when
his crops, his herds, or himself required it? If his fellow-
man were to be conciliated, and won to perform some act of
favour, the request must be preceded with the indulgence
of some wish of the other’s, a gift must be offered. A gift,
therefore, should be offered to the elements, and, forsooth, the
best that might be. Hence the origin of sacrifice. But if
the gift were wanting, instinct had already taught him the
power of flattery, and hence the origin of hymns of praise.
Prayer naturally followed these, and we have thus a complete
system of Element-worship. But while this was the work of
instinct, conscience was not quite forgotten, though man’s
nafural selfishness had led him to put it aside. Conscience
taught him that there was some unseen, unknown, Almighty
Being in and out of the world. Some one to create himself,
some one to create the world around. Some one to bring
death, arf to receive him after death, and accordingly the
notion of a Supreme Being took root deep in the mind,
though always with mystery and uncertainty. This, then,
constitutes the religion of the Barbarian age of most nations,
and to this may the most complicated mythology, the most
superstitious mysticism of after ages be reduced—the worship
of the elements, and the idea of a Supreme Being.

2nd. The Age of Mysticism, But as civilization progressed,
when the city rose from the village, and arts became more
and more ‘polished, the elements, which had been all in all to
the rude countryman, were useless to the civilian. Every
calling had now its patron, which, were he an element, an
historical personage, or merely an abstract idea, was equally


===== PAGE 29 / 300 =====

xxv BHAGAVAD-GITA.

deified. Self-interest demanded a supernatural guardian for
each man’s vocation, The soldier must have a god of war,
the sailor personifies and propitiates the storm and the waves,
the woodman cannot be alone in the huge forest rustling
around him, and peoples it with sylvan beings. Hence the
origin of Polytheism and Hero-worship. But the dawn of
civilization is also the age of poetry. It is not till man is
severed from nature that he loves and learns to imitate her,
to dream of her, and picture her in glowing colours. The
rustic may mingle rude verses in his village dance, and the
savage warrior chant fierce couplets of war, but though these
will possess a physical and majestic power, they will not be
that poetry which touches the heart with its softness, and in-
flames it with its fancies. The true birth of poetry dates in
every country from the first dawn of civilized life. And this
poetry exercises a powerful influence on the religion of the
people. It seizes greedily on all that is ideal; all, too, that
is ancient. Tradition has an untold charm for it, and it
blindly receives the errors of the past, for the mere sake of
their antiquity. Thus the idea of a great invisible Supreme
Being comes prominently forward, and the worship of the
elements, no longer the simple, selfish, but necessary faith
of the shepherd and husbandman, is incorporated with this
spiritual idea, and they themselves invested with mystic
personality. Hence we find in so many countries the notion
of a Trinity in Unity, superior to all deities; and even where
this distinct notion is wanting, as perhaps in the western
mythology, the elements have still lent their character to the
chief of gods. Jupiter has become at once the giver of life
and warmth, the lord of thunder and of rain,

But the idea of a deity once removed from the visible to
the invisible—from the actual to the ideal—poetry—imagi-
nation—does the rest. A complete theogony and a world of
gods is soon established. Man’s relation to the superhuman
world is now, too, placed on a different. basis. Where before


===== PAGE 30 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. XxIx

the gods were propitiated with an express selfish interest,
they now claim worship as their due, and promise little in
zeturn. Something, however, must be promised, or their
worship would soon fall into disuse and contempt; and the
reward offered is an equally ideal one, that of happiness after
death. But the hope of an uncertain future is not a suf-
ficient encouragement; some punishment must be added to
frighten man into the worship of the ideal and invisible ;
and the punishment is misery hereafter. These inventions,
which follow in a natural course upon the worship of ideal
deities, are supported and developed by the priesthood, a
class which has arisen in overy country at a very early
period, from the practice of performing sacrifices by proxy
to the elements and primitive deities; and who, when once
established, lose no means of keeping the religion they ad-
minister ever before the minds of its followers. Hence the
first ideas of right and wrong, future punishment and reward ;
and hence too the first dawning notion of the immortality
ofthe soul. In manners, then, this is the age of early civili-
zation and commerce, of the establishment of government,
and the administration of justice; in literature, it is the age
of the Lyric and Epic; in ideas, the age of superstition and
mfthology, of the establishment of a religion and a priest-
hood, of invention and imagination.

But a faith of such fictitious origin as that of Polytheism
could not long maintain its hold on thinking minds, at a
period when man discovered that he could reason as well as
imagine ; that, in short, he was gifted with intellect. The
priesthood might impose their invented cosmogonies and
legfons of gods and demigods on a timid populace, who
dared not risk their crop or their cow for the sake of truth;
but men were found towards the end of this period, who
were not only willing but determined to think, and throwing
the whole constitution of religion into the abyss of doubt,
to hazard eyen futurity for the liberty of thought.


===== PAGE 31 / 300 =====

Xxx BHAGAVAD-GITA.

8rdly. The Age of Investigation. The consciousness of
mental power and the desire of knowledge were disgusted at
the corrupt theology thrust upon the mind by a now tyrar-
nical and all-powerful hierarchy, and common sense began to
triumph over superstition. But the doubt which had been
cast on the fictions of the priesthood went no further. In no
country has early philosophy been sceptical : none among the
first thinkers have sought to deny the existence of what is
obvious to the senses, or of those senses themselves. Nay,
on the other hand, conscience has developed itself; and the
enquirer has been the first to establish the existence, and
even the immortality, of the soul. The existence of self and
of the world has been taken for granted, and the question
has been, “Why, and how, do I,—does this world, exist?”
“How long do we exist, and what do we become when we
apparently cease to exist?” The nature of the soul and of
the universe, rather than that of God, has been the topic
of early philosophy. The soul afforded a freer field for
investigation, unshackled as it was by the work of preceding
ages. But when the nature of the gods was proposed to the
enquirer, he generally accepted much from the established
religion ; the deities were left alone in their places, nor were
their various attributes disputed. But their glory*had de-
parted from them. A still higher being walked over their
heads: the Great Unknown was higher than they, because
more spiritual, less defined, and more absolute in his
sovereignty. Thus, at least, was it with Socrates and Kapila.
Both of them left their country’s gods in their places, but
both of them brought forward a new ideal deity to rob them
of their divinity—Socrates his Unknown One, and Kapila
his Pantheistic Soul.

This, however, could not last. All men were not such
spiritualists as the first thinkers, and man demanded some
more palpable notions of the deity whom he was asked to
acknowledge. From this arose the attempt 4o reconcile


===== PAGE 32 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. XXX

philosophy and the established faith, and consequently the
Age of Investigation has generally concluded with one of
controversy, and schools of philosophy and sects of belief have
divided the world between them.

‘We have thus seen the history of the mind of every nation
divided into three periods, the Barbaric or physical—the
period of conscience and instinct; the Mystic, superstitious,
and mythological period—that of dawning civilization and
Idealism ; and the Intellectual period—that of enquiry and
light. We do not for a moment suppose that every nation of
the earth has passed through these periods of development.
Far from it. Had such been the case, we should have had
fifty times the actual number of national philosophies, Both
internal and external circumstances have occurred to obstruct
and often annihilate the development of a race. Thus the
Britons were conquered by the Romans at a period of
barbarism. The Slavonic races are still lingering in the
second period. Egypt had never power to rise from mysti-
cism—which took such firm root along the borders of the
Nile—to the light of philosophy ; and the Hebrew people is
an exception to the whole theory, since they, and they only,
have been favoured at all times swith direct revelations of the
Trath. °

But of all nations which have had time and opportunity to
work out their own civilization, none affords so excellent an
example of what has been just shown as the Aryan or Hindi
race. For at least twenty centuries they were undisturbed
possessors of the same seat, in a climate which was itself
opposed to internal revolution, and with a character that,
more than any in the world, favoured the progress of thought.
‘When we speak of the Aryan race, we must not of course
consider them as the aborigines of India. There seems little
doubt that, at a period not long anterior to the use of the
Vedic hymns, they were a race of simple cowherds, who
entered tha Peninsula at the north-west corner, and long


===== PAGE 33 / 300 =====

XXx1L BHAGAVAD-GITA.

dwelt on the banks of the Scinde ere they penetrated into the
interior. Whatever the aborigines were, one thing would at
least seem clear, that the new race borrowed little from thent,
save perhaps a few generic names. But if the people they
subdued or drove out had no influence on the character of
the conquerors, the latter were not equally free from that
of the climate, and a great difference of character can be
remarked between the Epics that were sung in the Panjab
and the Drama that was acted on the banks of the Ganges.
In the Vedas we can trace with ease the period of barbarism,!
the nomad herdsman life, and the worship of the elements.
In the Vedic period only four elements are known, or at least
only four are personified, fire, water, air, and earth. But the
fourth, neither in India nor elsewhere, has been deified at an
early epoch, and the reason is obvious. The worship of the
elements is a selfish one, Sun, rain, and wind could ad-
minister, as they thought, voluntarily to the wants of man ;
but the earth was under man’s own control: he could plough
or dig it, and it yielded fruit; he could leave it alone, and
it did not act spontaneously. Again, the other three had
something unknown and unapproachable about them; ,the
earth, however, was man’s own, and he could not worship
the ground beneath his feet. Thus we find three ‘elements
deified in the Vedas, fire, water, air, or in their more common
forms of sun, rain, and wind, and the chief of these is naturally
the sun. The consciousness of a single Supreme Being,
Creator and Guardian of the world, was then brought into
play ; and to invest the idea with a palpable form, the chief
of the triad, the sun, was identified with it. Hence we find
in the Vedas, hymns which attribute to the sun all the

1 T do not mean by this that the Vedas, as writings, and as we possess them,
belong to the age of Barbarism. Polytheism and Mysticism havo already improg-
nated these ancient hymns, It must, however, be remembered that older 60
belonging to a simpler age, were banded down, and were incorporated with the
more reeent ones, and it is among these that wo find marked traces of Element.
worship. .


===== PAGE 34 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xxxiii

qualities of a Supreme Being, omnipresence, omnipotence,
the oversight and care of mankind, and a hundred more.
‘Thus the idea of one God was established by the side of that
of a Trinity, and in some degree connected with it.

Meanwhile, however, the phenomena of nature found first
wonderers, and afterwards worshippers; or rather they re-
ceived the respect, without the position of Gods. The
thundercloud was personified in Indra, and as he was the
most terrible and least comprehended, he soon became
the chief of the deities. Earthly fire and earthly water were
distinguished from sun and rain, and Agni, Varuna, and even
Vayu (the wind) were ranged among the demigods. But
once the habit of deification established, and it extended
in every direction; the earth, the air, the water, and tho
upper regions of the clouds were peopled by the superstitious
with beings favourable or obnoxious to mankind; Gandharvas,
the musicians, and Apsarasas, the beautiful nymphs, of
heaven, on the one hand: Daityas, demons and giants;
Peékshasas, evil sprites; and many more, on the other.

To this second period moreover must be assigned the
strange institution of Caste; which, in its perfection, if not
in its first idea, may be said to belong exclusively to India.
Its origin is to be traced, first to the separation of the con-
quered aborigines from their conquerors, and next to the
power of the priesthood. In an examination of the four
castes, Bréhmans or priests, Kshatriyas or warriors, Vaishyas
or artizans, and Shidras or slaves, we find that the three
first are united, and severed widely from the last, by the
privilege of investiture with the Bréhmanical thread at years
of maturity, which seems to indicate that they all ranked
among the conquerors; while the wretched Shidra, who
claimed no right to such a privilege, was undoubtedly the
converted but enslaved native. Meanwhile the priesthood,
as is everywhere the case, being the class to whom learning
of every kind was confined, felt and asserted their mental


===== PAGE 35 / 300 =====

XXXIV BHAGAVAD-GITA.

superiority ; and drawing themselves apart, secured their
right by making it a crime unpardonable in this or the next
life, to killa Brahman. The distinction, lastly, between the
knight and the artizan, is but a natural one, which has
sprung up in every land and every age. Thus the institution
of Caste, so favourable to the supremacy of the hierarchy and
the pride of the nobility, gained ground, till a divine origin
and supreme laws were arrogantly claimed for it, and the
Vaishya and Shiidra did not dare to rebel. But this very
institution—established so firmly, and strengthened by every
artifice of the priesthood, supported as they were by warriors
and monarchs—was well nigh the cause of its own ruin.
1Five hundred years before Christ a social and religious revo-
lution took place in India, which only failed because it was
premature, but which nevertheless could send its doctrines
over the whole earth, and gain a hold, which it has since
kept, over nearly a third of the inhabitants of the entire
globe. We have said that learning was centered in the
Bréhmans. It was their profession, as war and kingship
were that of the Kshatriya. The Brahman was therefore
the first in whom the light of reason dispersed the cloud of
superstition. The Bréhman was the first to doubt the truth
of the faith he upheld and administered to passive multitudes.
The Brahman was the first philosopher : Kapila, Patanjali,
the Vy4sa, Jaimini, Gautama and Kanéda, the founders of
the philosophic schools of India, were all Brahmans. Poets,
astronomers, grammarians, musicians and physicians, belonged
to the same caste.

But if the light shone among the Bréhmans, they were
sensible enough to hide it beneath a bushel, and their policy

1 The Hindis place Buddha 644, 643, or 646, w.c, This however is by no
means a certainty. The King Kanishka or Kanerki is said to have flourished
exactly 400 years after Buddha, and the coins of this monarch dotermine his
date as 40 a.., thus making the date of Buddha 360 ».c. For a full account
of the controversy on the subject, see Weber's “ Vorlesungen tiber Sanskritische
Literatur-Geschichte.” ‘


===== PAGE 36 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. XXxV

was that of the priesthood of popery, to keep the people
always in the dark. The schools that listened to the doctrines
of Kapila and Patanjali were but small knots of studious
Bréhmans, and it was only when controversy broke in, that
the fever of sectarianism was communicated to the people.
Then was the power of the priesthood shaken, then was its
infallibility declared a falsehood, when it could not agree
in the tenets it taught; and, when nothing but the spark
was wanting to set the whole in a blaze, Buddha came from
the far west—a prophet of liberty appeared to preach the
divine doctrines of equality and independence, and the people
rose in a mass against their oppressors, But the foresight of
the Brahmans had been judiciously employed. They had
bound the strength of the nation firmly to their side. The
Kshatriya had been taught that all his interests were with
the priesthood, and opposed to the artizan and the merchant;
and Buddhism, which flourished for a while, was at length
driven by arms to seek a long home in China, in Ceylon, and
ine Thibet, and even to impregnate early Christianity with
some of its forms,! if not of its doctrines.

We have dwelt long on this Buddhist revolution, because
we look on it as a visible manifestation of Hindi Philosophy.
It‘is, of the one hand, a social, on the other, rather a
philosophic than a religious revolution, and late studies have
demonstrated that the doctrines of Buddha were, one and all,
those of Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya school. Nor
can we consider the latter to be very long anterior to the
former. Whether J3uddha be placed in the sixth or the
fourth century before Christ, the rise of philosophical ideas
cannot date much before the seventh century. The Aryans
can scarcely have established themselves in the, north and

1 Such for instance aro the institutions of monastic and conventual life, the
retirement from the world and self-torture of hermits, the uso of bells for churches,
of rosaries, of pictures and relics of suints; and many other customs, the origin of
which is difficult to account for in any other manner.


===== PAGE 37 / 300 =====

xxxvi BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

centre of India long before the ninth or tenth centuries before
Christ. The system of castes had then to be established, the
character of the whole nation had to change gradually,
through the effect of the climate; from the hardy activity
of the Do&b, to the contemplative routine of the Ganges:
the disgust to life, the great secret of the first ideas of Hindi
Philosophy, had to be induced and fixed by a steady change,
wrought by the climate and geographical peculiarities of the
new country ; ere the Bréhman even, supported as he was
by tithes, and faring on the fat of the land, without labour
and with nothing but the mind to set in motion, could find
it necessary to seek consolation in a hidden and uncertain
future.

To this disgust to life must we therefore attribute the first
blooming of contemplation in India, the first philosophical
ideas; and when we say that the Sankhya system must be
regarded as the earliest development of such ideas; and
Kapila considered not only the founder of that school, but
the originator of all Indian philosophy; we must be under-
stood to speak of those ideas reduced to a system. Singly,
they must have had an earlier origin, and much speculation,
much demonstration even, must have preceded Kapila. The
very regularity, simplicity, clearness, and decisivenéss of ‘his
arrangement militate forcibly against the supposition that
any man should have discovered, worked out, and perfected
such a system, without any groundwork to build upon. We
might as well believe Euclid to have been the earliest mathe-
matician, as that Kapila was the first philosopher. He is,
however, the first of whom we have any traces, and it will
therefore be our object to delineate, as correctly as possible,
the rise and development of those ideas which he borrowed.
from his predecessors. .

The first great tenet which Indian philosophers established,
if we may not say discovered, was the individual but connected
existence of souls. That man, endowed with a consciousness


===== PAGE 38 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. XxXxvi

of his own existence, with the power of reflection, and the
thirst for knowledge through internal investigation, should
feel convinced, in the very outset, that there existed that
within him which was neither matter nor mind, which was
eternal and superior to matter, is only natural: but that,
knowing that each man was more or less like himself, and
therefore gifted with a like soul, he should perceive any
original connection between his own soul and his neighbour’s,
and seek a common origin for them, is not consequent on
mere contemplation. Some existing belief must have aided
the earlier philosophers in arriving at this conclusion; and
this. we believe to have been metempsychosis or the trans-
migration of souls. As this belief constitutes the basis of
all Indian philosophy, it may be well to give some account
of it. Undoubtedly it is the most novel and original idea
ever started in any age or country; undoubtedly, too, the
place of its invention is India, and India only; and the age
—that period immediately preceding the rise of what are
properly called philosophical ideas, and immediately follow-
ing the reduction of polytheism to a system. Greece owes
it to Pythagoras, Pythagoras had it in person either from
Egypt or India. Egypt received it from India with her
Osiris afd Isis, with her cargoes of apes, parrots, and gold.
In India it originated; and—though Voltaire would attribute
it to the prohibition, necessitated by the climate, against
killing certain animals, and the reverence thence attached
to them, from which they were supposed to possess souls like
man; and though St. Hilaire would discover its origin in
the absence of any feeling of individual personality and
spirituality, arising from the sensuality of the Indian dis-
position—I cannot but think that it is to be traced to
nothing more nor less than the polytheism which preceded
it. We have already shown how the elements were per-
sonified. Other personifications followed quickly upon these;
but what did these personifications amount to? In the most


===== PAGE 39 / 300 =====

XXXVUL BHAGAVAD-GITA.

mystic periods of the mythological age, these elements, these
natural phenomena, these beings which peopled space, were
undoubtedly believed to possess bodies more or less like those
of men; but this did not constitute their personification: it
was not by these invisible bodies alone that they could
witness, judge of, and interfere in the affairs of men; they
must have possessed more than a mere corporeal likeness to
man in order to do this, they must have had minds to dis-
criminate and wills to apply; and this will constitutes, in
the earliest ideas, the soul itself. The deities, then, possessed
an individual personality like that of man. But the system
of deification had gone still further. Admiration had given
heroes an apotheosis; and, in the meanwhile, the life of the
jungle, and the love of, and necessity for, the chase, had
rendered the Indian more intimate with the inferior animals
than any other race. He had learnt to descry several of the
attributes of man in each of the wild beasts with which he
had to deal. The ape had afforded him a most striking
instance of this; and from India do we thus derive thase
many fables which attribute human thoughts and human
voices to quadrupeds, birds, and reptiles.! Thus gods,
animals, and even elements and natural phenomena, were,
so to speak, humanized; while, on the other hand, ufen
and beasts were deified; and hence the recognition of like
souls in all three classes of beings. But the likeness of these
souls to one another would immediately give rise to the idea
that the same souls passed through certain grades of bodies,
from animals to man, from man to gods. This idea once

\ It is worthy of notice that those animals chiefly are introduced in these
fables with which the HindG was most intimately acquainted—domestic animals
and the larger beasta of the forest (fish and insects appearing but rarely). The
characters given. fo each—the good-natared gully ‘of the elephant, the
bumptious stupidity of the ass, the insidious pandering of the jackal, the calm
philosophy of the tortoise, and the folly of the ape—are proofs of ‘the early
attempt to affirm their possesion of souls, endowed withthe same peculiriies ax
those of man,


===== PAGE 40 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. XXXIX

implanted, the belief in the eternity of the soul would imme-
diately ensue, since it would be seen that in passing from one
body to another, the body it quitted died, whereas the soul
died not, and this idea would be repeated to infinity. The
eternity of the soul once established, a certain number of
individual souls would be supposed to exist and to have
existed from the creation of matter, which they occupy, and
thus @ common origin would have been easily asserted for
them. This common origin was Spirit, which was later only
identified with the Supreme Being ; and since the individual
souls emanated from it, they must also, at the dissolution of
matter, be re-absorbed into it. It therefore exists, and con-
tinues to exist, and keeps up its connection to a certain degree
with the souls which have emanated from it.

Thus, then, we have the first tenet of philosophy, the indi-
vidual existence and connection of souls, with which are
connected the eternity of the soul and its transmigrations.
The disgust to this life, the certainty of its repetition by
mgans of those transmigrations, the knowledge of the eternity
of the soul, and of the existence of a spiritual essence, into
which it would eventually be re-absorbed, now induced men
to ask how this re-absorption might be hastened, and trans-
migration thus avoided. The answer was both natural and
noble—Knowledge. The grades through which the soul had
been traced, from reptile to beast, from beast to man, from
man to inferior deity, from inferior to superior deity :—when
the soul had reached this point, it was at the utmost limit of
material bodies: what was beyond? The essence of spirit,
into which it was to be eventually re-absorbed. How then
coulfl this point be gained without the long process of trans-
migrating from body to body P Of course, by rendering the
soul as niuch as possible like that of the superior deity. And
in what did his superiority consist? The superiority of
man over beasts was that of his mind, his knowledge; that
of the gods over man would be the same; and it was there-


===== PAGE 41 / 300 =====

xl BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

fore knowledge which made perfect, and perfection which
emancipated the soul from matter. This superior knowledge,
said the earlier philosophers, is philosophy itself acquired hy
contemplation.

The next great tenet established by the early Aryan philo-
sophers was the individual existence and connection of material
bodies. This, of course, resulted from perception and reflec-
tion, a very little of which showed them that when a body of
any kind lost its individuality, it decomposed and yielded up
each of its elementary parts to those other combinations of
elements which were ready to receive them. But though
they were fully convinced that each body of matter was
composed of elementary parts, they did not recognize the
fact that these elementary parts re-appeared in other bodies,
after the decomposition of the first, and they consequently
attributed the apparent disappearance of these elements to
re-absorption in a new principle, which Kapila was probably
the first to systematize, and which we shall have occasion to
describe later. It is now sufficient to say that it was,to
matter what the essence of spirit was to the individual soul.
From it the elementary parts emanated, and into it they
were again absorbed.

Thus, in the earliest ages of investigation, was the great
question, ‘What am I?’ answered in its psychological and
physiological points of view; and in all this, inquiry, not
doubt, was the impulse. The existence of the soul was first
established, and consciousness was the means employed.
From this fact was deduced the existence of spirit. Again,
the existence of matter was received as a thing of course, and
perception was here the instrument of investigation. From
the existence of matter, that’of a material essence was
deduced by a like process. In both these deductions, infer-
ence had to supply the place which Revelation on the one
hand, and science on the other, occupy in Christian philo-
sophy. But it remained for a later age, it remained for


===== PAGE 42 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xii

Kapila to draw the line accurately between matter and soul,
soul and spirit, and to reduce to a regular system their re-
spective developments.

But a loftier question was soon to be proposed, and doubt
was soon to replace investigation. This question was, ‘Why
do I exist? Why does matter exist?’ ‘I grant,’ said the
enquirer, ‘that matter and soul, that spirit and material
essence, exist under the given conditions; I feel the same
disgust to life, and I am convinced that there is a future of
some kind ; that, when my body is exhausted by age-and
disease, my soul quits it, but still exists. I have perfect
confidence in the grades of transmigration you put before
me; I believe that I shall be a deity, and that I have been
an animal; I can judge for myself that one such state of
existence is better than another, and since all are more
or less bad, I admit that the only real state of happiness for
my soul will be liberation from material existence of every
kind, and re-absorption into the spiritual essence. But what
is the reason of this existence? what is that which condemns
me to what I loathe? to what can we ascribe this regular
organization of spirit and matter? I know the how, I wish
to know the why.’ It was this question which first divided
philosophers. As long as investigation was confined to per-
ception, to inference drawn from perception, and lastly to
Revelation, the final resource when these two failed, philo-
sophers had been united. But this was a question of specu-
lation, and as such many views might be maintained of it
according to each man’s ideas rather than his belief.

At this period of enquiry Kapila stood up, not however to
answér, but rather to evade the question. He had turned
his attention rather to the physiological than to the psycho-
logical vieww of the universe, and he became, without an effort,
materialist. Perception and inference had taught him a
system for matter, which removed the necessity of the exist~
ence of a Creator. He had inferred the existence of a material


===== PAGE 43 / 300 =====

xiii BHAGAVAD-GITA.

essence, and the regular emanation of all matter from it,
and its re-absorption into it. One thing only was wanting,
the will to decree this emanation and this re-absorption.
This will he gave to the material essence, and this, under
the name of Prakriti, or nature, became the plastic principle,
and, to a certain degree, the deity of his system. At the
same time he did not deny the superiority of spirit, and the
inferiority of matter. He tacitly admitted the spiritual
essence side by side with Prakriti, the material essence; and
the connection of soul—the emanation from the one—with
body—the emanation from the other; but he went no
further. Had he given to that spiritual essence the will
which he gave to Prakriti, acknowledging, as he did, the
superiority of spirit, he would have dubbed it a deity—a
supreme being, the efficient, though not the material, cause
of the existence both of soul and matter. But this was
@ point of speculation beyond the limits of his field of
enquiry. Kapila is silent on this point, and his silence has
acquired for him the name of atheist (nirtshwara). °
The question of ‘why?’ was now taken up, and while
Kapila, followed by minds the most remarkable in India, if
not-in the whole ancient world, formed a school which laid
the basis of Buddhism, and through it, was destiaed here-
after to influence the minds of a third part of the human
race; another school arose, scarcely less atheist indeed to
our ideas, but theist compared with what had gone before.
Of this school we have no actual remains; but its existence
cannot be doubted, from that of the two schools which grew
out of it, namely, Patanjali’s, and that of the Bhagavad-
Gité. This school we may denominate the Theistic (seshtara)
S4nkhya. It received from Kapila all but the concession
of will to Prakriti, the material essence, Its great addition
was the assertion of the existence of a Supreme Being.
This idea was not a new one, it was no invention, but simply
a revival. We have already seen that it existed in the wor-


===== PAGE 44 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xliti

ship of the elements, but whether it were there the remains
of a tradition handed down from Ararat, or the pure detection
oftconscience, is of no importance here. It is sufficient to know
that it was not entirely lost sight of in the age of superstition
and polytheism which followed, and that it was now again
brought forward to solve the doubt which rose, as speculation
advanced upon investigation. But the Supreme Being of
early philosophy was the necessary result of Kapila’s system.
‘Will was denied to the material, and conceded to the spiritual
essence. The latter was deified, and the material essence was
then in a mystic manner made a portion of this deity, In
short all existence was referred to the existence of this Being,
all action to his will. His will it was which caused souls to
emanate from himself, and which, working on the material
portion of himself, caused matter to emanate from the ma-
terial essence. Thus the position which Kapila had de-
manded for Prakriti, the material essence, was not refused to
it. It was still deified in being made a portion of the Deity
himself; but volition, and that only, was denied it. The
why was now explained. It was the will of the Supreme
Being that he himself should undergo this development into
individual soul and organized matter. It was his will that
evil ‘shoulf exist beside good, which alone existed in him;
and that the soul, placed in a body the lowest in the scale,
should gradually ascend till it reached that of man. To
man alone was the choice between good and evil granted,
to him alone was it possible to effect his emancipation from
material life, by the same means which Kapila had set
forward—perfection through knowledge; or by the neglect
of this means, to rise in the scale of material bodies by
obedience to the established religion, or to sink by neglect
of both. *

Thus a new school was formed which seemed to satisfy
doubt, and was the more attractive to the Hindi mind,
since it offergd it a mystery on which to contemplate, and


===== PAGE 45 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GITA.

a theory to be worked out according to fancy. It was a
more pliable, a more acceptable, a more tangible system
than that of Kapila; and while the latter, careless of the
future, and seeking truth in the explanation of the present,
gained admirers and followers among the less selfish, tho
more courageous, and the higher class of minds, the Theistic
Sénkhye found many to espouse its cause among those
secondary intellects which a fear of the future urged to
demand some palpable object of worship. These followers,
however, were not men of the first class of intelligence, and
we have consequently no writings left by them; while those
of the schools which were grafted on the pure Theistic
Sénkhya were the productions of later ages, and the works
of Brahmans, who could not forget their office of preceptor
in their love of philosophy. Their systems are so closely
connected with the history of the changes of the Indian
mind, that we shall devote the next section to the attempt
to demonstrate the causes that gave rise to their formation,
and the controversies which, ensuing on their promulgation,
were the origin of the foundation of the other so-called
schools of Indian Philosophy.


===== PAGE 46 / 300 =====

PART II.

ON THE SCHOOLS OF INDIAN PHILOSOPHY.

Tue schools of which we have received actual remains are
considered by the Hindis themselves as six in number, in
the following order :—
1, The Atheistical (nirishwara) Sankhya, attributed to
Kapila.
2. The Yoga Schools of Patanjali and the Bhagavad-Gité.
3, The Pirva-Miménsé, attributed to Jaimini.
4, The Vedanta or Uttara-Miménsé, to the Vydsa, Krishna
Dwaipéyana.
5. The Nydya, of Gautama,
6. The Vaisheshika, of Kanada.
Oug own arrangement would differ somewhat from that of
the natives. We would reject the Pirva-Miménsé entirely
from the list. As will afterwards be seen, when we come to
speak of it, this work is not a treatise on Philosophy, but
a mystical, superstitious, Bréhmanical essay on the Vedas,
to call which Philosophy would be to insult the schools
which properly bear that title. We would also supply that
school mentioned in the last part of the preceding section,
of which, it is true, we have no actual remains, but which
must necessarily have preceded the Yoga of Patanjali and
the Bhagavad-Gité. Our list would then stand as follows,
as faf as is possible, in chronological order:— ,
1, The Atheistical Sénkhya, of Kapila. The plastic
principle
2, The Theistical Sankhya. The Supreme Being.
8. The Nyéya, of Gautama, The logical method.
4, The Yoga, of Patanjali. Emancipation by asceticism.


===== PAGE 47 / 300 =====

xlvi BHAGAVAD-GiTA. .

5. The Vaisheshika, of Kanéda.! The Atomic system.
6. The Karma-Yoga, of the Bhagavad-Gité. The princi-

ples of asceticism applied to every-day life. .
7. The Vedénta, or controversial and mystic Bréhmanical
school.

These seven schools, however, are comprehended in not more
than three principal systems, which for the sake of concise-
ness may be denominated the Sénkhya, the Nydya, and the
Vedic systems. The first will include Nos. 1, 2, 4, and 6;
the second, Nos. 3 and 5; the third is No. 7.

Of the six schools recognized by the Hindus, none are
considered as strictly heterodox; none, in short, denied the
existence of the deities of the established mythology, none
subverted the existing forms of worship; but the Pirva-
Miménsé is the only one which is considered as strictly
orthodox. The Bréhman was permitted to study the Sénkhya,
the Yoga, the Ny4ya, and the Vaisheshika systems; but while
much of their doctrine might be received without danger,
much also was to be rejected. In our own arrangement,,the
first three schools probably preceded the revolution of Buddha.
When once that great blow had been aimed and struck with
effect at Bréhmanism, an age of sectarianism followed ; not
however till the shock had been recovered, the malcontents
again forcibly reduced to submission, and the hierarchy re-
sumed its tyrannical supremacy. It was impossible for
a contemplative race like that which dwelt on the banks of
the sacred river, when once the chains had been snapped
asunder, to submit tranquilly while the links were being
mended; but the Bréhman was now determined to fortify
his rule against all such conspiracies, and the new sthools

1 Weber (“Indische Literatur-Geschichte,”” Berlin, 1852) considers that the
Nysya and Vaishephika were composed much about the same time, and sees no
ree to done fist the latter is fogiea! a ancient. I & & in ae oe
anything so doubtful as a chronological arrangement, but the echool of Ka
beara, to my mind, marks of being posterior to thet of Gantame.


===== PAGE 48 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xlvii

were declared heterodox and heretic, and their followers
compelled to gather themselves into sects. As in the period
which succeeded the first spread of Christianity in the east,
and that which followed our own reformation in the west,
the spirit of sectarianism grew apace. Sects multiplied on
all sides, divided and sub-divided chiefly by minute philo-
sophical distinctions; and ere long, India was severed into
more classes of belief than perhaps any country, including
America at the present moment, ever contained.)

The founders, however, of the schools of philosophy re-
cognized by the established religion, had a better claim to
the clemency of the priesthood. Unlike those of the earlier
heterodox sects, they were Brahmans; and however little
they may have credited the doctrines upheld by their caste—
however little respect they may have entertained for their
text-books, the Vedas—they were certainly too much
wedded to the institutions. of their country, and had too
little reason to complain of a system which gave to the caste
to,which they belonged a position of undisturbed ascendancy.
They were also, perhaps, too negligent of the things of this
world, wedded as they were to their own theories, to attempt
to infuse their dogmata into the minds of the populace, and
by €0 doing to undermine the existing state of government.

As it is to the system which we have generally termed
Sénkhya that the doctrines of the Bhagavad-Gité most
directly draw our attention, its separate branches will be
separately treated; and we shall now confine ourselves to
a view of the causes which influenced the rise of those
branches, and shall then proceed to a brief sketch of the
Nyéya and Vedic, more properly called the Logical and
Mystic, systems.

1 For an account of these sects, consult Colebrooke’s Miscell. Essays, vol. i.
On Indian Sectaries,’ and ‘Wilson's Essay on the same subject in vols. xvi. and

xvii. of the ‘ Asiatic Researches.’


===== PAGE 49 / 300 =====

xviii BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

‘We have already said that the history of Indian philosophy
was intimately connected with that of Indian civilization
and development. This is more particularly perceived in
observing the rise of those branches of the Sénkhya system
which seem to be posterior to the revolution of Buddha.
The Theistic Sénkhya, which placed the philosophic doctrines
already uttered by Kapila on @ more certain and tangible
footing, by introducing and uniting with them the notion
of one Supreme Being, had already been received and gained
ground; but—though the existence of such a Being had been
admitted, and that, too, not only among the philosophers
who now formed themselves into a school, but even among
the Bréhmans themselves, who afterwards incorporated this
idea with their own religion, and even found it expedient
to prove its existence in the Vedas—though no one denied
the importance of effecting by some means the emancipation
of the soul from material existence—no one had as yet
thought it necessary to diverge from the existing state of
things, by raising this Being to the position of an object
of worship, and making the accomplishment of emancipation
dependent on adoration of him. The followers of the
Theistic Sankhya, while they insisted on the existence of a
Supreme Being, as uniting the essences of matter and soul,
as creator of the universe, and as receiving into himself on
emancipation the souls which had emanated from him, still
received the same means of effecting that emancipation as
Kapila had put forward, namely, knowledge; that is, a
correct knowledge of the nature of matter and spirit, and
of the causes which occasioned the union of these two.
When asked how such knowledge was to be acquired, Kapila,
imbued with a thorough belief in his own system, had
triumphantly pointed to it. To be » faithful believer in
that system was to ensure emancipation. But when a school
was formed which denied one of its principal dogmata, and
inserted another still more important, the study of that


===== PAGE 50 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xlix

philosophy was no longer a sufficient means of emancipation.
Practice had hitherto been confined to the established re-
ligion; theory and belief only had been brought into the
field by philosophy. But this philosophy was now to be-
come practical—this speculation was to be superseded by
application, and a mere theoretical belief was to be extended
to @ system of religious worship. This extension was the
work of Patanjali.

‘We have then much reason to believe that this extension,
this adaptation, and, so to speak, organization of the Sénkhya
system, was posterior to the revolution of Buddha. In the
first place the Yoga of Patanjali offered a new scheme of
religious worship; and, though it is true that in so doing
it did not displace the established religion, its very principles
were of so absorbing a character, that it rendered that re-
ligion an useless and worthless formality. Before the shock
which Bréhmanism received from Buddha, such a proceed-
ing would have been impossible. The very despotism which
cawsed that revolution would have prevented a form of
worship rising up in its own bosom to replace the one which
it cherished. As long as philosophy was confined to theory,
Br&hmanism could leave it uxidisturbed; but when it was
organized into practice, and threatened to displace what the
Br&hman used all his influence to uphold, it became danger-
ous, and had to be treated accordingly. When, however,
Buddhism had burst forth, when the Brahman was attacked,
not in his belief only, but in the ordinances of his practice,—
when the altars of the established religion were abandoned
by thousands, and its temples destroyed,—he was but too
glad” quietly to connive at the introduction of a system
which, from the very difficulties it offered, threatened no
extensive injury to his profession; or, at least, he was too
much occupied with Buddha, and the rising of other castes,
to attend to a movement which took place in his own under
the calm direction of Patanjali.


===== PAGE 51 / 300 =====

1 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

The system of ascetic exercises, of austere mortification of
the flesh, and the eremite life in the jungle, did not originate
with the Yoga school. The very cause which induced the
whole Indian nation, Aryan and aboriginal,—when once
settled on the banks of the Ganges, and in the interior and
east of the Peninsula,—to submit without a murmur to, if
not to receive with acquiescence, at least for some centuries,
the system of caste imposed on them by the Bréhman;
while, when yet but an unorganized horde pushing on from
the west and north-west, the Kshatriya, then the most
extensive and most powerful caste, had struggled against his
growing supremacy in that insurrection of which we have
traces in the legend of Parashu-Rdma (see Index),—that
very enervating settled stillness of the climate had also
wrought in the character of the nation a complete and
general change. No longer itching for activity from the
vital energy boiling in their blood—no longer exhilarated
by a fresher and less leaden sky—the Kshatriya and the
Vaishya gradually succumbed to the same irresistible climatic
influence which had made the Shidra, once their opponent,
now their slave. Too inert for ambition, too torpid for
action, they were fain to receive a system which prescribed
limits to their field of duty, and were satisfied ss long as
those bounds were not passed. Nor would they ever have
been passed, had the hierarchy, acting with judgment, never
exceeded moderation in laying the yoke too closely on their
shoulders. The climate induced inertness and sloth; inert-
ness gave time to an Indian mind to turn its power towards
contemplation. Contemplation loves isolation, and, in all
ages, isolation and contemplation have induced that ‘self-
examination which has resulted in an internal war of soul
against body, of the conscious sentiment of religioh against
the senses. This war was carried out by mortification, which
the very burning of the southern sun rendered still more
necessary. When once the senses gained the ascendancy,


===== PAGE 52 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. li

the climate rendered their victim more beast than man. He
became like an elephant in the season of rut—mad, raging.
What fasting effected, and still effects in the south-west of
Asia, mortification was found necessary to supply in India ;
and this mortification had already been necessitated—already
brought into general usage—long, perhaps many centuries,
before Patanjali endeavoured to reduce it to a system, and
employ it as a means to organize philosophy into a religion.

Patanjali was, moreover, a follower of the Theistic Sankhya.
He tacitly received Kapila’s psychological and physiological
system ; denying, of course, the deification of Prakriti, the
plastic principle, by itself alone; admitting it when in-
corporated with the deification of spirit, and with it forming
one Supreme Being. But since the establishment. of a
Theistic S4nkhya school, it had become necessary to render
these doctrines more practically applicable. The revolution
of Buddha, and the gradual enlightenment which smoothed
its path, had made it needful to place philosophy on the
same footing as religion had hitherto maintained, and so to
break down the limits which confined it exclusively to a
small circle of intelligent and studious Brahmans. Emanci-
pation was to be acquired by all alike. But the means
which the Theistic Sénkhya had offered were the exclusive
property of the learned. Knowledge—acquired by instruction
and study—even when contemplation was added to these—
was within the reach of the Brahman alone. Patanjali did
not deny the efficacy of knowledge, but extended the facili-
ties for its acquirement. Contemplation and ascetic exercises
superseded instruction and study, and his system was thus
mado open to all. .

There is reason to believe that in the period which fol-
lowed the expulsion of the Buddhists from India, Patanjali’s
school spread very generally through the wide regions which
owned the sway of Bréhmanism. One portion of the system
in particular afforded a bait for the worldly and self-interested.


===== PAGE 53 / 300 =====

lii BHAGAVAB-GiTA.

of all castes to adopt it in practice, if not in faith. The
lengths to which mortification was carried by men whose
contemplation and solitude had rendered them more than
ordinary fanatics, had often reached the marvellous; and
the apparent ease with which the austerest hardships and
the most excruciating tortures were endured by these
ascetics, gave rise to the belief that these very exercises
endowed them with superhuman powers. In systematizing
the whole, Patanjali had brought this idea prominently
forward. He believed that such powers—which he classed
under the name of vibhiti (see Section IV.)—were actually
acquired by the exercises he enjoined; and that the latter,
united with devotion of the heart, thoughts, and soul to the
Supreme Being, obtained for their practiser a state in which
—though still existing in the material body—the soul was
virtually severed from it, though not so completely as at
the final emancipation. This state of existence he called
Jiwanmukti, and among the miraculous powers which the
being possessed while in this state was that of destroying
one’s private enemies by a curse. This then was the lure
which drew so many followers to the practice of Yoga; and
when to this is added the awe and reverence naturally felt
for a man endowed with such superhuman capabilities, and
the good treatment and hospitality which all to whom he
came would be careful to show him, we cannot wonder that
a class of hypocrite Tapaswins should have sprung up and
infested the land, as they still do in most parts of our Indian
possessions.!

Wherever a burning sun scorched, and a hot wind stifled,
the broad plains of eastern and central India, the disgust
to life, the disposition to contemplation, and the desire for
final emancipation, drove the populace to the consolation of

1 Of the prevalence of this custom we have many hints in our own poem, ey.
Chapter XVIL, shlokas 5, 6, and 7. .


===== PAGE 54 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. li

asceticism. The very nature of the life led by the Muni,
the cool retreat by some refreshing stream in the distant
solitude of the jungle, the serenity to which he reduced his
heart, the taming of burning lusts and luxuriant senses, and
the halo of pure and all-powerful sanctity which surrounded.
him, allured first the Bréhman, but soon the Kshatriya also,
from the toils of an active life to the enjoyments of such
profitable repose. Kingdoms and principalities were aban-
doned to their own guidance, states were left defenceless,
and nobles and princes vied with priests and pietists in the
sanctity of their monastic lives, the austerity of their de-
votions, and the supernatural powers acquired by their
means.! Nor was this all. In virtue of the powers they
acquired, the nobility would seem to have asserted their
equality with the hierarchy, and even to have attempted to
wrest from them their exclusive rights of administering to
the mental and spiritual necessities of the people. The
Bréhman trembled at this new danger; and, no longer able
toeseck support in any of the other castes, had recourse to
conciliatory means; and the way was thus prepared for the
teachings of the Bhagavad-Gité. Such, however, were not
the only causes which gave rise to the Karma-Yoga doctrines
of our potm ; and a long interval of perhaps several centuries
must have intervened between the Yoga of Patanjali and
the new branch of that school. Indeed if we may place
the probable date of the Yoga-sitras between 400 3.c. and
100 B.c., we must consider that of the Bhagavad-Gité to lie
between 100 8.c. and 300 a.p. But this only by-the-way.
From the first revival of the idea of a Supreme Being,
a considerable change had been wrought in the established
religion. The Bréhmans had found it expedient gradually
to admit and incorporate with their own teaching the more

1 A story of such rivalry betwoen Church and State is found in the Vishwé-
mitra, an episoge inserted in the well-known epic, Rémfyana,


===== PAGE 55 / 300 =====

liv BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

general and broader theories of philosophy, while in the
mean time they wove around them a peculiar mysticism of
their own, which formed at once their charm and their
defence. The mystic triad of Brahmé, Vishnu, and Shiva,
had succeeded to those of the Elements, the Vedas, and the
Epos; and were soon identified with the Supreme Being.
Brahmé was considered the manifestation of the creative,
Vishnu of the preservative, Shiva of the destructive and
regenerative, powers of the One Supreme. But though
these three dignities had been recognized as a triad; they
do not appear to have been regarded as a Trinity in Unity
until a much later period. Brahmé, as the first—and for
a long time the most important—person of this triad, and
as having taken the place of the sun in the worship of the
elements, was first identified with the Supreme Being; and
this identification would seem to have held good for a long
period, while the established religion was occupied in com-
bating the numerous heresies which succeeded Buddhism.
But the very elevation of his position rendered the worship
of Brahmé less general than that of the other persons of
the triad, and Shiva and Vishnu each rejoiced in more
numerous shrines. It would seem that the awful character
as Destroyer which Shiva (who replaced Vayu, or the wind,
in the elementary, Agni, or fire, in the Vedic, and Yama, or
death, in the Epic triad) bore, won him more followers
than Vishnu, his brother deity; and at an early period his
worshippers identified him with the One Supreme. At
Jength reason and love surmounted fear and superstition, and
Vishnu the preserver—the kind, the merciful, the tender—
was identified with the Supreme Being in like manner. *

All this took place in the established religion, and was the
work of Bréhmans themselves; but the spirit of schism had
already crept in, and the animosity between the Shaivyas,
or worshippers of Shiva, and the Vaishnavas, adorers of
Vishnu, was far more hot and bitter than any that had


===== PAGE 56 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. lv

existed between the established religion and the seceding
heresies. Lastly, Krishna, the eighth and most important of
the incarnations of Vishnu—who in his character of Preserver
of mankind was supposed to descend to earth in certain
earthly forms (avatdéras) for the purpose of protecting or
extending his religion—Krishna was himself raised to an
equality with Vishnu, and identified with the Supreme One.
To this sect of the Vaishnavas—which is commonly called
the Bhégavata sect, from Bhagavat, ‘the Holy One,’ a title
of Krishna—does our author belong; and at this period—
when the strife between the Vaishnavas and Shaivyas was
first growing warm—when religious enthusiasm, pervading
the whole nation, had rendered asceticism dangerous to the
community, on the one hand, as threatening to destroy its
vitality and energy: and to the Brahmans, on the other, as
raising rivals on their own hitherto-undisputed ground in
the persons of fanatic Kshatriyas—when the taste for
literature, which civilization had infused into the people,
wag sufficiently cultivated to appreciate and encourage the
dramas of a Kélid4sa, and to revive the elegant and measured
shlokas of a Valmiki—when the-crafty Bréhman seized this
growing taste to turn it to his own account in the diffusion
of didactic writings—the Bhagavad-Git4 appeared. It was
the work of a Brahman, a philosopher, and a poet, united in
one man. With unparalleled skill, its author convérted the
very doctrines—which, originating with Patanjali, had
seduced thousands from the active duties of the city or the
provinces to the monastic seclusion of the jungle—to a
means of recalling them to those duties, of setting a limit
to th® fanaticism and ambition of the nobility, of establish-
ing the necessity of the restrictions of caste even under the
most difffoult circumstances, and of infusing into the hearts
of all a religious, a philosophic, and, in some respects, almost
@ Christian, morality, As a Bréhman, he belonged to the
more liberal and less Vedic party; and while conciliating


===== PAGE 57 / 300 =====

lvi BHAGAVAD-GiTA,

the Keshatriya, sought to place Bréhmanism on a more
generous and less prejudiced footing. As a philosopher, he
united the metaphysics of the Theistic Sankhya with: a
system of ethics quite his own, though formed on the basis
of those most popularly received. As a poet, he incorporated
his piece with the most favourite of the ancient epics, and
worked on the feelings as well as on the minds of his readers,
by interlacing with his sterner dogmata the fanciful, the
mysterious, and the awful. In a word, if the Bhagavad-
Git& be the work of one man, and we have no reason for
believing the contrary, its author was undoubtedly the most
remarkable man of his own age, and would have been an
honour. to any nation and any epoch. To unite the skilful
and elegant poet with the clear and systematic philosopher,
and these two with the shrewd and successful reformer, is
an undertaking of no small merit; and this was achieved
by the author of our poem.

‘We have now traced the causes which gave rise to the
foundation and formation of the Yoga and Karma-yega
schools. In Sections IV. and V. the doctrines of these
schools will be examined in detail. It only remains at
present to give a concise description of the principal objects
in the Vedic, the Nydya, and the Vaisheshika schtols. As
these schools present no direct bearing on the teaching of
the Bhagavad-Gité, we cannot do more than give a general
outline of their distinctive features, and must refer the
student who would examine them more minutely to the
fountain-heads whence we draw our information.!

At the period when the sun of civilization was first dawning
upon the night of superstition and blind faith, and the ‘more
refined among the Indian nation sought those deep waters

1 Such as Colebrooke’s Essays, vol. i., ‘On the Philosophy of the Hindus.’
Windischmann’s ‘Geschichte der Philosophie’ (Bonn, 1827-34), pp. 1740, 1904,
etc.


===== PAGE 58 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. Ivii

which they believed would quench their thirst for knowledge
of the truth, the learned Bréhmans employed two means for
arriving at this end. The less superstitious applied them-
selves to investigation by means of the powers which they
felt they possessed, and the result was the development of
that Sénkhya system which we have traced through its
various changes. The more conservative had recourse to
revelation, and laid the foundation of what we have termed
the Vedic school. Both, however, felt that no certain_con-
clusion could be educed without a systematic process of
reasoning; and by the side of these schools, which hurried
past the means in their haste to arrive at the end, arose a
third, which made the arrangement of the means their more
particular object. This school was that which not long after
was moulded into the Ny4ya, and maintained its position till,
in after-ages, it flourished in the Vaisheshika system.

The existing revelation (for such it was believed to be),
embodied in the Vedas and sacred writings, belonged chiefly
to 4 period anterior by some centuries to that of the dawn
of enlightenment; and every day the real meaning of that
writ became more and more obscure, partly from the changes
which the Sanskrit language was undergoing, and partly
from the attempts of the Brdhmans themselves to turn its
tenets to their own purposes, and the mysterious complica-
tions that resulted from such efforts. It would appear that
schools were soon formed for the sake of discussing and
disputing the meaning contained in the Vedic writings, and
among the fruits of these discussions we have received the
Piurva- or Karma-Mimansé,! which is attributed to Jaimini,
and the principal commentary on which is by Kumérila

1 For a detailed account of this Darshana, see Colebrooke’s Miscel. Essay
vol. i. p. 295, and Windischmann’s Gosch. der Philos, p. 1760. ‘The meaning
of the name is ‘The first investigation,’ or, ‘The investigation as to actions.
Mindnad has almost the same ‘meaning as Jgjndsd. It is the abstract substantive
from mimdns, the desiderative form of mdn, vite investigate,’ and would therefore
mean ‘the desire to investigate the trnth *



===== PAGE 59 / 300 =====

lyiii BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

Bhatta, the chief opponent of Buddhism. The Hindis
rank it among their six Darshanas, or schools of philosophy ;
but, as we have already said, it cannot be considered. to
possess any title to that position. It treats of the practical
part of the Bréhmanical religion, and consists of 915 adhi-
karanas, or topics of discussion, each of which contains five
subdivisions, as follows :—

1. The subject to be investigated.

2. The doubt and question relative to it.

8. The first view and comprehension of the grounds of

proof, the primd-facie argument ( purva-paksha).

4. The answer (uttara-paksha).

5. The conclusive test.

The only philosophical dogma which it appears to contain is,
that all actions are mystically connected with their results,
so that from the moment the act is concluded, the agent
acquires a mystic virtue (apurva) which does not quit him
until, whether in this or in a future existence, the reward
of the action be administered to him; in short, a specigs of
spiritual promissory note for services performed.

When—a century or more after the establishment of such
theological schools—the revolution of Buddha broke out,
Bréhmanism was for a long time too much occupied with its
avowed enemies to attend much to its own internal changes.
The Brahmans gradually received—partly from conviction,
partly from expediency—the broader tenets which philosophy
was daily establishing. The change was slow, for the con-
servative spirit was difficult to combat; and the Vedas, for
which a divine authorship had long been arrogated and
conceded, and even the later works which professed ‘to ex-
plain and elucidate them, were regarded by all with a degree
of reverence, which the difficulty of comprehending them
materially increased. Whenever a new idea, propagated by
the schools of philosophy, obtained so profound a credence
in the minds of the rational and intelligent, and was sup-


===== PAGE 60 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. lix

ported by such irresistible arguments as to render it danger-
ous, the Bréhman, adopting a wise policy, did not oppose
it with his Vedic texts; but, on the contrary, used all his
logic to prove that somewhere or other in the sacred writings
the very dogma had been hinted at, if not clearly expressed.
But a considerable change had taken place in the relative
position of the Bréhmanical religion. No longer the uni-
versal church of civilized India, it was surrounded by new
sects more or less popular. Like the once universal church
of civilized Europe, when, after the Reformation, it was
compassed. by sectaries, Brdhmanism employed an admirable
and prudent policy. It gathered itself firmly together, and
—supported by its antiquity, and its asserted divine au-
thority—it declared the new doctrines unworthy of its
refutation, and damned them as heretical and destructive.
When its external enemies were thus shaken off, and the
established church stood firm in its compactness, it at length
found time and tranquillity to examine its own organization.
The,Darshanas or schools of philosophy which had grown
up within its own bosom, and quietly influenced its own
changes, now became the object of its enquiries; and the
line was at length distinctly chalked out between what of
their theories could be received and what must be rejected.
Several centuries after our own era, the Vedénta or Uttara-
Miméns4! school collected its forces, revised its materials,
and came forward as the philosophical opponent of the
philosophical schools.

The foundation of this school was attributed, like many
other works of very different ages and contradictory doctrines,
to the® Vydsa, Krishna Dwaipiyana, the supposed compiler
and arranger of the Vedas. He is otherwise called Badaré-

1 That is, (The Latter Mimfns6.’ It is also called the Sharfraka or meta-
hysical Miménsa. Both titles aro meant to distinguish it from the Parva or
Kem a-Miménst, with which, however, thero is little danger of confounding it.
It is generally said by the Hinds that the Parva treats of the practical (karma-
4m), the Uttara of the theological part (judna-kdnda) of the Vedas.


===== PAGE 61 / 300 =====

ik BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

yana; and in order to claim a divine authority for the
doctrines attributed to him, he was said, as a Brahman of
the name of Apéntara-Tamas, to have once attained final
emancipation, and have been absorbed in the Supreme Being;
but, at-his command, to have emanated again and assumed
@ corporeal form as Krishna Dwaipéyana. The principal
Scholiast on his writings is Shankara Achdrya, who is
thought to have flourished in the eighth century of our
era,! and his work is entitled the Sharfraka-Miméns4-
Bhéshya, or commentary on the Sh4riraka-Miménsé, As
a theological school, the name Vedanta refers to the whole
Vedic School, which explains the whole theological portions
of the Vedas; and among the works belonging to it are
numbered many of the Upanishads or Vedic writings, as the
Ysha, Keneshitam, Mundaka, and Kathaka and parts of the
Chandagya. The doctrines of the pure Vedanta school are,
to a great extent, those which we shall find put forward
in our own poem ; but there are very considerable and very
important differences, which it is not in our plan to particu-
larize here® Their chief peculiarity is, of course, the
Br&hmanical and superstitious odour which pervades them
all, and the mystery and obscurity which have been purposely
introduced. The arguments employed against the doctrines
of the other schools are extremely subtle and refined, but one
instance will suffice to show their worth.

As in the Bhagavad-Gité, the Supreme Being is regarded
as the material as well as the efficient cause of creation; in
other words, he is supposed to have formed everything by
changing himself into matter. This was opposed by the
assertion that in every creation an instrument or inst#uments

1 Weber (Ind. Phil. Gesch.) places the composition of the Vedanta two or
three hundred years before Shankara Achfrya, thus about 400 or 600 a.p. It
cannot be earlier than the third century after Christ.

2 "We must therefore refer the reader to Colebrooke's Mise. Essays, vol. i. p. 325 ;
and Windischmann’s ‘ Gesch, der Philosophie,’ p. 1767, ete.


===== PAGE 62 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. in

are required besides the creator and the material. To this
the Vedénta replies by comparing this change of the deity
himself into matter with that of milk into curds. The objec-
tion is thus raised that here too an instrument, namely, heat,
is employed; and the Vedanta replies by asserting that milk
will turn of itself, and that heat merely hastens the action of
turning; or, again, that other things are subjected to heat
without becoming curds.

The triviality of such arguments is sufficiently obvious to
all; but there is a grand fallacy at the bottom which we are
astonished the would-be philosopher has not perceived. If
spontaneity of change be admitted, as he would have it, in
milk, and if, as he also insists, the same rule holds good for
the Supreme Being as for milk, then milk must be on equality
with the Supreme Being. He asserts that the spontaneity of
change in the Supreme Being is the proof of his having
created the universe. But since the same rule holds good
for milk, the spontaneity of change in milk must also be a
proof of its having created the universe, and milk is therefore
creator of all things, which is absurd, etc.

The Nyéya! system has been attributed to a celebrated sage
named Gotama, or Gautama (who must not, however, be con-
founded with Gautama, or Buddha, the founder of Buddhism).
The order he observes is Enuntiation (uddesha), Definition
(lakshana), the mention of some property peculiar to the thing
enuntiated, and Investigation (partkshd), examination of the
pertinence of the definition; and with his method he has
treated sixteen topics, as follows:

I. Proof (pramdna) of four kinds, viz. Perception;
Inference, both consequent (@ priori), antecedent
(a posteriori) and analogous; Comparison; Affirma-
fion, #.e. revelation and tradition.

1 For minuter details, see Barthélemy St. Hilaire, ‘Prémitre Mémoire sur le
Nyéyu’ published by the Institut de France; and Colebrooke's Mise, Eaeye,
Vol, 1, p. 261,


===== PAGE 63 / 300 =====

lsii BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

II. Things to be proven (prameya). Under this head he
includes all the psychological and physiological
theories, borrowed with little alteratior from the
Sankhya, viz. :—

1. Soul, of two kinds—the Paramdtmd, or supreme
soul, creator of all things; and Jindtmd, indi-
vidual souls of men.

2. Body, of four kinds—aqueous, igneous, aérial, and
terrene.

8. Organs of sense—five in number.

4. Objects of sense—including all external matter.

5. Intellect—part of internal matter.

6. Heart (manas)—another part of internal matter,
the internal organ of sense,

III. Doubt (sanshaya).

IV. Motive (praygjana).

V. Instance (drishtdnta)—a point on which both dis-
putants agree.

VI. Demonstrated Truth (siddhdnta) of four kinds, accerd-
ing as it is universally, partially, hypothetically, or
argumentatively acknowledged.

VII. A complete syllogism (nydya) consists of the following
five members (avayava), of which the first two are
simply enuntiative.

1. The proposition (pratijnd), as, This hill is fiery.

2. The reason (hetu or apadesha), as, For it smokes.

8, Instance (udéharana or nidarshana), as, What smokes
is fiery, e.g. A fire-place.

4. Application (upanaya), Accordingly the hill is
smoking.

5. Conclusion (niyamana), Therefore it is fiery.

VIII. Reduction to absurdity (tarka).

IX. Ascertainment (virneya), the result of proof.

X. Disputation (kathd) of the kind called jalpa, of adver-
saries contending for victory.


===== PAGE 64 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. Ixiii

XI. Disputation (kathd) of the kind called vdda, or dis-
cussion of adversaries only in pursuit of truth.

XII. Disputation (Aathd) of the kind called vitandd, or
wrangling, wherein one seeks to overthrow the other,
without putting forward a proposition of his own.

XIII. Fallacy or mere semblance of reason (hetwdbhdsa).
XIV. Fraud (chhala) of three kinds.
XV. A futile answer (ati) of twenty-four kinds.
XVI. Failure in argument (nigrahasthdna), or, Reason of
defeat (pardjayahetu) of twenty-two kinds. 7
The Vaisheshika school is attributed to the Muni Kanada,
who follows the same method as Gautama. The chief differ-
ence is the introduction of a theory of atoms, in the physio-
logical portion of his arrangement. His atom is however a
different object, being the sixth part of a mote in a sunbeam.
The mote is divided into three parts, each of which is a double
atom. The cause of the concurrence of these atoms is either
the will of the Creator, or time, or any other competent one.
The, single atoms unite with one another to form a double
atom; three double atoms unite to form the smallest visible
body, and these bodies unite to form larger bodies, and so on.
The atoms themselves are eternal The dissolution of matter
is merely sits resolution into atoms. Under the head of
‘Things to be proven,’ the second topic of Gautama’s system,
Kanada has—
I. Objects of sense, consisting of six paddrthas, or categories,
as follows :—
1, Substances—nine in number, viz. :—
1, Earth—eternal as atoms, transient as aggregates.
The latter are either organized or inorganic.
u. Water—the same.
ui. Light—the same, identified with heat. Organic
light includes the bodies of the solar realm ;
inorganic is of four kinds, terrestrial, celestial,
alvine, and mineral.


===== PAGE 65 / 300 =====

xiv BHAGAVAD-GiTA,

1v. Air—the same. Organic aérial bodies are angels
and demons. Inorganic air is wind.
v. Ether (ékdsha)—is infinite and therefore eternal.
vi. Time—is one, eternal and infinite.
vir. Space—the same,
vit. Sou/—immaterial,
1x. Heart (manas)—the internal organ of sense.

2. Quality, of twenty-four kinds, viz.: colour, savour,
odour, feel, number, quantity, individuality, con-
junction, disjunction, priority, posteriority, gravity,
fluidity, viscidity, sound, intelligence, pleasure, pain,
desire, aversion, volition, virtue, vice, and faculty
(sanskara).

8. Action (karma), of five kinds. It is motion, devoid of
quality, abiding only in substance.

4, Community (sdémdnya), of three kinds, abides in sub-
stances, quality, and action.

5. Difference (vishesha), the direct opposite of community.

6. Aggregation (sémdvaya). .

7. Negation (abhdva), of two kinds, universal and mutual.

II. Activity (pravritti), is oral, mental, and corporeal,

III. Faults (doshah), are desire (rdga), aversion (virdga), and
delusion (moka). .
IV. Condition after death (pretyabhdva), is transmigration.

V. Retribution (phala), is the result of fruition (punarbhoga).

VI. Pain (duhkha).

VII. Liberation from pain, or beatitude, is of twenty-one
Kinds.

It has thus been seen that there is a strong connection
between the logical system of Gautama and the physics of
Kanéda,! but both are indebted for their truly philosophical
portion to the Saénkhya. In short, when we reconsider the

LL For farther details of the Vaisheshika, see Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous Essays,
vol. i, p. 261.


===== PAGE 66 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. ixv

six Darshanas, acknowledged by the Hindis, we shall find
that one of them, the Uttara-Mimé4ns4, bears no title to be
ranked by the side of the others, and is really little more than
a mystical explanation of the practical injunctions of the
Vedas. We shall also admit that the earlier Veddnta, very
different from the School of Nihilists now existing under that
name, was chiefly a controversial essay, seeking to support
the theology of Sacred Writ, but borrowing all its philoso-
phical portions from the Yoga school, the most popular at the
time of its composition. Lastly, the Ny4ya is little more
than a treatise on Logic, introducing the doctrines of the
theistic S4nkhya; while the Vaisheshika is an essay on
Physics, with, it is true, the theory of atoms as its distin-
guishing mark, though even to this we feel inclined to refuse
the imputation of novelty, since we find some idea of it lurk-
ing obscurely in the theory of tanmdtrdni, or subtile elements,
which is brought forward in Kapila’s S4nkhya.! In short,
the basis of all Indian philosophy, if, indeed, we may not say
the only system of philosophy really discovered in India, is
the Sankhya; and this, as it forms the basis of the doctrines
exppunded in the Bhagavad~ Gité, we shall now attempt to
explain in detail.

1 See Section III.


===== PAGE 67 / 300 =====

PART III.

THE SANKHYA SYSTEM.

To a European of education a name is of trifling import.
When once his reading or his experience has connected a
certain idea, however vague, with a certain name, however
inconsistent with it, that name will be as good as, and better
than, any other to convey that idea. Not so to the literal and
logical Hindu of some six or seven centuries before Christ, and
accordingly the names of the schools of philosophy convey
the meaning of the most prominent doctrine which they put
forward—Sdnkhya, Yoga, Nydya, Vaisheshike, and even
Vedanta, are titles which indicate at once the school and its
principal peculiarity, and from internal evidence these names
would mostly seem to have been assumed by the earliest
writers themselves on the doctrines they designate.

The word Sankhya has been interpreted in two ways. It
is an adjective derived from the substantive sankhyd, the first
meaning of which is ‘number,’ and has hence been rendered
‘the numerical system’ by those who were misled by the
distribution of its principles into twenty-five categories. But
besides this first meaning the word sankhyd has also that of
‘numeration, computation, calculation,’ and hence ‘delibera-
tion, reasoning,’ and sdnkhya has with more reason been
translated ‘the rational system.’ Kapila, like Descartes, re-
fused to accept the authority of anything which had preceded
him; he placed revelation in the lowest rank of the sources
of ascertainment; he would accept only what his reason or
his conviction would accept, and hence the origin of the title.

The Sénkbya system was the first and only real system of
philosophy to which the Indian mind gave birth. Though


===== PAGE 68 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. lxvii

six or even seven schools of philosophers may be admitted to
have existed in the earlier ages of that nation, they were all
more or less indebted to this school for their fundamental
dogmata. Some of these, however, have followed more closely
in its steps, and have been generally ranked under the same
name. Of these we may distinguish four, viz. :—

1. The pure Sénkhya (nirishwara), of which we have
remains.

2. The Theistic Sankhya (seshwara), of which we have no
remains, but which must have existed, and is un-
doubtedly meant by the allusions in the Bhagavad-
Gité; as, for instance, in Chapter ITI. shloka 3, etc.

8. The Yoga of Patanjali; see Section IV.

4. The Karma-Yoga of the Bhagavad-Gita.

These doctrines extended however still further, and in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries of our era we find them some-
what changed, and frightfully disfigured by Bréhmanical
mysticism in many of the Purdnas. A Paurdnika-Sénkhya
school is therefore generally enumerated among the branches
of the general system ; but, as far as it is possible to judge of
the philosophical tenets contained in those eighteen extra-
ordinary works of the debased age of the Indian mind, they
bear no title to be considered as a separate school of philo-
sophy. It is with the first of these schools, the pure, the
nirtshwara, or atheistic Sankhya, that we have now to do;
and the first questions which enquiry prompts are, who and
what were its founder and its earliest teachers? what the
existing remains of it which we have received ?

To the first question we must answer, the Hindi Kapila:
not necessarily that this great Rishi was the first philosopher
of which India could boast, or even the first to discover the
doctrines of this system, but that to him has its foundation
always been referred ; while the Siitras attributed to him are
the earliest which reduced these theories to a system. Kapila
was in all probability a man, and not a myth, though his


===== PAGE 69 / 300 =====

lxviii BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

Asiatic admirers have done all they could to make him one.
Though he has been called an incarnation of Agni, the per-
sonification of fire, and of Vishnu himself, he was probably,
like most early philosophers both in India and Greece, a
simple schoolmaster. He was a bréhman, whose learning had
acquired for him the privilege of instructing the young of
his own caste, when they had finished the rudiments of their
Vedical education; and he taught them, for want of text
books and a printing press, in short, well-composed, well-
defined, sentences, which his pupils committed to memory,
and which, as they strung them together one with another,
in the best way they could, were called Siitras, or ‘threads.’
The first disciple of Kapila of whom we have mention in
the Sankhya-kériké (shl. 70) is Asuri, of whom we know
nothing more. Asuri delivered the doctrines he had received
to Panchashikha, to whom Siitras are attributed, and who is
named in the Mahdbhérata as teaching the Sankhya to
Janaka, the celebrated King of Mithilé. Panchashikha is
said by Yshwara Krishna (Sankh.-kér. shl. 70) to have made
these doctrines generally known, and may therefore possibly
have lived but a short time previous to the revolution of
Buddha, one of the causes of which was undoubtedly the
propagation of these philosophical theories. Perhups some
six or seven hundred years! later, at an age when literature
was generally appreciated, and when all learning was greedily
sought after, when the garb which enclosed it had become
sufficiently attractive, Yshwara Krishna, who had received
these doctrines transmitted from bréhman to br4hman, sat
down to arrange them in a new and more comprehensible
form, and to invest them with the charms of an epic metre.
Yshwara Krishna was not, like Kapila, a schoolmaster. He

1 Barthélemy St. Hilaire suggests that Fshwara Kyighna may have been one of
the many learned men gathered round the throne of the patron of sciences,
Vikramiditya, who flourished 66 n.c. Weber would place him in the sixth
century of our era.


===== PAGE 70 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. imix

did not detail his doctrines to studious ears; but, an author
of no mean merit, he experienced the difficulties of acquiring
the S4nkhya from the existing Sutras; and being superior to
the drudgery and dependence of a mere scholiast, undertook
to put them before a reading public in a clear and systematic
form.

The works from which we gather our knowledge of the
Sankhya system in its purity consist, firstly, of the Sutras.
These are attributed to Kapila himself; but it is not on that
account to be imagined that that philosopher ever descended
to the transmission of his ideas to the page. The collections
of his dogmata, as they have been handed down, were pro-
bably made by studious disciples, long after he had ceased to
exist. They are entitled the ‘Sankhya-pravachana, or Intro-
duction to the Sankhya,’ a work of four hundred and ninety-
nine Sutras, comprised in six Adhy4yas or readings. This
work was printed at Serampore in 1821, and is now extremely
rare. Another collection, an abbreviation of this, and also attri-
buted to the great founder, is the Tattwa-samasa, published
at Mirzapore, by Doctor Ballantyne, in 1851. The first of
these works is accompanied by a commentary by Vijnéna
Bhikshu, entitled Sankhya-pravachana-bhashya.

Our next source is the Sankhya-kériké of Yshwara Krishna,
the text of which was published by Lassen at Bonn in 1832,
to which was added a Latin translation. In 1833, M.
Pauthier added to his translation of Colebrooke’s Essays, a
text in Latin characters, and a French translation. Windisch-
mann gave a German translation in his ‘Geschichte der
Philosophie,’ vol. i. p. 1812, published at Bonn in 1834.
In 1837, Professor Wilson published the translation made by
Colebrooke, with the addition of the text, a translation of the
Scholia*of Gaudapada, and a short commentary of his own.
Lastly, in 1852, M.-Barthélemy St. Hilaire has given us an
able French translation, with explanations and essays, which
do great honour to his thorough insight into the philosophical


===== PAGE 71 / 300 =====

Ixx BHAGAVAD-GITA.

ideas of India. These works, and the well-known treatise by
Colebrooke, are the reliable sources from which a knowledge
of the Sankhya system may be derived.

Indian commentators have distinguished the pure Sénkhya
as nirishwara, which has been injudiciously translated by
‘atheistic’ Ishwara, lit. ‘lord,’ is the title given by the
Theistic Sankhya to the Supreme Being, whose existence is
their chief doctrine. This branch has therefore been called
seshwara (=sa, ‘with,’ + tshwara), ‘possessing,’ that is,
‘acknowledging such a Supreme Deity’; and to distinguish
it, the other has been termed xérishwara (= nir, ‘ without,’
+ ishwara), ‘not possessing,’ that is, ‘omitting to acknow-
ledge such a Being.’ But the word ‘atheist,’ as we are
accustomed to use it, is a term of the greatest reproach, and
signifies one who actually denies the existence of a Being
superior both to matter and to man. Kapila has not done
this. He does not, it is true, mention the existence of such
a Being, but he leaves it doubtful whether he exists or not.
He treats of philosophy rather in relation to matter and man
than to spirit; for, as has been already asserted, the earliest
philosophers rather desired to satisfy the enquiry as to ‘what’
is man? and what is this world?’ than to push speculation
beyond the limits of obvious proof; and it was left:to a later
school to enquire into the final cause, when once matter and
spirit had been fully investigated and firmly established.
Again, it is true that he grants volition to nature, and thus
in some sort deifies it; but when, by the side of this, we find
him, at the same time, asserting the superiority of spirit even.
to this deified nature, we cannot accuse him of complete
materialism. Lastly, he admits the existence of a spiritual
essence, from which individual souls have emanated, and into
which they are eventually to be re-absorbed ; and though he
confines himself to this simple admission, and does not in-
vestigate the real nature of this spiritual essence, the very
fact that he makes it superior to nature is sufficient to show


===== PAGE 72 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. Ixxi

that, had he gone farther, he would, like his successors, have
declared it to be the Supreme Being. The pure Sénkhya is
therefore so far atheistic as it refers the creation of matter to
a system of emanation, obedient to the will, not of a creator,
but of Prakriti, ‘nature,’ the essence of matter; but not only
does it not deny the existence of a Supreme Being, but even
hints at it in referring the emanation of individual souls to a
spiritual essence gifted with volition.

What is Kapila’s idea of philosophy? A cure for the evils
of this life ;! and since the heavens, and deities to which we
are supposed to go, are also material, and since we are subject
to the necessity of transmigration, it is a cure for the evils,
not only of this life, but of any material existence through
which we may pass. It has already been said that the dis-
gust to life was the cause of the rise of philosophy, and we
have here the proof of it. That these evils exist no man will
deny. But where is the remedy for them? The specific
remedies which each man may practically apply to each
particular evil are obviously faulty; for the evils will return
again, and even the necessary means of cure cannot always
be obtained. Again, the established religion of Bréhmanism
is of no validity. It offers, as a reward to its followers, a
material heaven, in which even the gods themselves are liable
to evils, and are not immortal. The only means of over-
coming evil—which is of three kinds, internal or personal,
external or that which is received from without; and, lastly,
that which is beyond our power to oppose or check, the
superhuman—is by liberating the soul from the shackles of
matter, and this is performed by the perfection of knowledge.
In granting so much power to knowledge, Kapila is un-
doubtedly on the right tack. Knowledge is power; know-
ledge is the highest perfection of man ; the superiority of one

* Kepile, Sinkhye-provachena, ch. i, sftras 1-4; and Tehwara Krishna,
Sankhya-kérika, shi. 1.


===== PAGE 73 / 300 =====

Ixxii BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

man over another, of gods over man, and of the Supreme
Being over gods, is according to the superiority of their know-
ledge; but we must not allow ourselves to be beguiled. by
this siren-like dogma. Kapila has omitted by the side of
knowledge what is undoubtedly superior to it, virtue; and in
so doing has incurred the censure of making it of no avail.
This is a most dangerous principle, since morality is at once
destroyed by it; and though Kapila himself, accepting as he
does the established religion, the usefulness of sacrifice, and
the excellence of doing one’s prescribed duty, is far from
inculcating it; the result of the mere omission was that
the Theistic Sénkhya, which succeeded him, in raising a
deity above the gods of Bréhmanism, threw such contempt
on the ordinances of that religion as threatened to subvert
all morality, and necessitated the adoption of the devotional
system contained in the Yoga of Patanjali, where the ordi-
nances of Bréhmanism were superseded by a new system of
practical morality. Thus the object of philosophy is final
emancipation, and in the mean time that consolation for,the
evils of this world, which practical philosophy affords. The
means proposed is knowledge.

But what is this knowledge? It is the knowledge of the
whole truth, which philosophy teaches, and which defines the
reason of our existence here on earth, by drawing the line
between matter and soul, nature and spirit; and showing the
connection of these four to one another; the reason of their
connection, and their final disconnection.! How then is this
knowledge acquired? What, in short, is the philosophical
method adopted by Kapila? Perception, inference, and testi-
mony. Perception is the use of our senses in grasping’ those
objects which are within their reach, such as developed matter.
Inference is the use of our reason, in proving the ‘existence
of what is beyond the reach of our senses from that which is

» Kapila, ch, i, sitras 6, 16, 18, 19, and 81; Sankh-kér., sbl, 1 and 2,


===== PAGE 74 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. Ixxiii

within their reach, and it is of three kinds, viz. that of effect
from cause, that of cause from effect, and from comparison.
Testimony is of two kinds, actual revelation and tradition.
By inference the great doctrine of causality is established,
and the existence of the imperceptible is proved, as that of
nature, or the material essence, from that of developed
matter. When both perception and inference fail, we must
often accept revelation and tradition, and from this are
received the doctrine of transmigration, and the existence of
the gods.! Kapila has often been accused of scepticism, from
a misunderstanding of shl. 64 of the Sénkhya-kérik4; but
for two reasons we should rather impute to him too great
credulity. In the first place, he has accepted without a mur-
mur two important dogmata, transmigration and the existence
of the gods, from Bréhmanism ; and in the second place, he
has omitted, as quite unnecessary, the greatest means in the
true philosophical method—conscience, or internal conviction.
The excuse for the first is that transmigration was a theory
whieh chimed in wonderfully with his own ideas, besides being
long firmly implanted in the Indian mind, while the gods
interfgred not the slightest with his system; but at the same
time he has made testimony the /ast resource of investigation,
and place@ it on a far inferior footing to perception and
inference. The excuse for the second is his distance from
scepticism. Te never doubted for a moment his own exist-
ence, he never dreamed of denying the truth of the im-
pressions made on the senses, and by them conveyed to the
mind and the soul. The questions he proposed to answer
were not “ Do I exist?” “Does matter exist ?” but “ What
am I?* «What is matter?” and tacitly receiving conscience
as an axiom, he thought it necdless to make it a means of
proof, sindo what it could prove was already admitted.

So far we have followed the order of the SAnkhya-kériké,

1 Sankh.-kfr,, shi. 4-8; Kap., eb. i. stitras 99, 100, 61—65, 107, 108,
o4


===== PAGE 75 / 300 =====

Ixxiv BHAGAVAD-GITA.

and, as far as possible, that of Kapila’s Sutras also. We
have shown his idea of philosophy, and his method, and we
must now proceed to his doctrines and system. It is here
unnecessary, and would become tedious, to follow the order
of the originals, and we shall therefore endeavour to put
before the reader a general view of the system, under the
most convenient arrangement. We have first to treat of the
general system, and the psychological portion of it.

The pure Sénkhya itself, and all the schools which follow
it, distinguish everything which exists (the latter of course
excluding the Supreme Being) into the following twenty-five
categories.

1, Nature: the material essence, which is Kapila’s plastic
principle, by him gifted with volition. It is called by the
following names, Prakriti, or Mulaprakriti; Pradh4na, or
Milapradhéna; Avyakta (the undeveloped principle); May&
(the magic illusion); and in the Bhagavad-Gité, ch, xiv.
shl. 3, Brahma (neuter). This principle has no cause, no
origin, is not produced by anything; but is cternal, universal,
immutable, single, independent, free from qualities, simple
and sovereign.

With these nine attributes it produces Matter, the de-
veloped principle, which emanates from it. Thfs is called
tyakta or jagat, and has nine attributes opposed to those of
nature, viz. (a) it has a cause or origin (namely nature),
(6) is not eternal, (c) not universal, (¢) mutable, (c) multiple,
(f) accidental, (g) attributive or gifted with qualities, (4) com-
pound, (i) subordinate, which are thus accounted for :—

(a) Because it emanates from nature.

(b) It has been created, and must therefore perish ; 3 it
has emanated from nature, and will be re-absorbed
into it.

(c) It is this universe only, and must therefore be finite.

(@) It varies in its various component parts, which it pro-
duces in order.


===== PAGE 76 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. lxxv

(e) It is composed of twenty-three parte.

“(f) It depends on nature for its existence.

+(g) It has various attributes,

(A) And components.

(i) It is subordinate to the will of nature, on which it

depends.
This general term comprises twenty-three components,
viz.:—

2. Intelligence (buddhi, mahat, dsurt, mati, kydti, prajnd):
the first and immediate production of nature. Although it
is material, it is the link between the soul and matter, and in
the same relation to the soul as the senses are to the body, it
is the actual vehicle and material manifestation of the faculty
given to the soul, of perceiving and employing matter.
Without it the soul could never be connected with matter.
This category produces, or rather from it emanates

3. Consciousness (ahankéra, abhimdna, bhitddi, taijasa,
vaikrita): the conviction inherent in us of our own indi-
vidnality. It produces two classes of material components :
firstly

4—8. The five subtile elements (¢anmdtra): the elements
of the elements, which would seem to be essences containing
the attributes of the five grosser elements. They are sound
or noise, tangibleness, odour, visibleness, and taste, which
each in turn produce

9—13. The five grosser elements (mahdbhuta): which are
ether (dhdsha), which is produced by the subtile element of
sound, and is that subtile fluid which fills all space, and
exists everywhere and in everything :—air (rdyu); atmo-
sphere and wind, which is produced by the subtile element
of tangibleness, which is its peculiar attribute :—earth, pro-
duced by’ the subtile element of smell :—light, heat, or fire,
produced by that of visibility:—and water, produced by that
of sapidity. On the other hand, consciousness also produces

14—18. The five senses (indriya), faculties of perception,


===== PAGE 77 / 300 =====

lexvi BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

corresponding respectively with the elements, viz. hearing,
touching, smelling, seeing, and tasting, and also

19—23. The five organs of action (karmendriya), viz.: the
voice, the hands, the feet, the anus and the penis. Lastly,
consciousness produces

24, The heart (manas), which is considered as an eleventh
or internal organ. It is the general power of sensibility, it
receives and arranges the impressions made on the senses
by external objects, transmits them, thus arranged, to the
consciousness, which transmits them to the intelligence,
which transmits them to the soul. It is also the seat of
desires and passions. These twenty-three components, then,
make up the Vyakta, the developed principle, perceptible
matter.

25. Spirit (dtmd, purusha, pumdn, kshetrajna), special and
independent of both nature and matter. It is not produced
by anything, nor can it produce anything; and while nature
and matter are irrational, it is all reason.

Nature and matter have thus each nine opposite attributes,
but they have also six attributes common to both,! viz.:
1, Want and comprehension. 2. Objectiveness; being the
objects of use to the soul. 3, Commonness; they are com-
mon to all alike, and objects of usc to all. 4. Insensibility ;
for though the senses themselves belong to matter, it is not
really they which fcel, and are impressed, but the soul; they
being merely the material vehicles and instruments of sensi-
bility. 5. Intelligence; for though intelligence is the first
product of nature, and, in turn, produces all the categories
of matter, it is, like the senses, a mere material and physical
machine, dead and useless without the soul, which sets it in
motion, as the steam engine is only locomotive when united
with the steam. 6. Productiveness; nature produces matter,

1 Sank.-kar., shl. 11. Kapila, ch, i, sdtra 121,


===== PAGE 78 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. ixxvul

which produces its own components. Lastly, they are in
common subject to the three qualities of good, bad, and in-
different, of which anon.

Such is the outline of the system to which the Sankhya
reduces all that exists. But before inquiring into the re-
lationship of these parts, and the positions, independent and
relative, which they hold, we must show some proofs of their
existence. As scepticism has no place in the philosophy of
Kapila, he does not apply his method rigidly to developed
matter. The means of proof of its existence is simply per-
ception through the medium of the senses and the judicious
employment of our mental faculties. The existence of nature
and spirit are therefore to be demonstrated, and the means
employed is inference.

The existence of nature as the cause of matter is proved
in five Ways,! and the great doctrine of causality thus estab-
lished :— :

1. The finite individuality of different existing things
proves that they must have an external cause. Were they
themselves their own cause, they could have no limits, no
beginning. -

2. The likeness which exists between several individual
objects, forming them into a class; and again, the broader
features of resemblance discovered between such classes ;
proves a common origin.

3. The actual activity in everything that is formed for
action, proves the existence of an enlivening principle, and
the special destination of each agent. (N.B. This argument,
which scarcely proves the existence of a materiul essence,
would’ be an excellent proof for that of a Supreme Being,’
director and destinator of everything; but, in his view of
matter, Kapila is undoubtedly materialist to a certain extent.)

) Bank,-kar., shloka 15. vas .
? It is, in other words, the old argument: ‘Tho world exhibits works of design,

and myst therefore have had an intelligent maker,


===== PAGE 79 / 300 =====

ixxvin BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

4, The complete difference between cause and effect, which
is perceived in every common matter, proves that matter
cannot be its own cause, and requires something distinct
from matter as its cause, and this is nature.

5, The inseparable unity of the whole universe, no part of
which can exist without and independent of the rest, shows
the indivisible source from which all spring.

In these arguments we perceive that the Sankhya has not
hesitated to grant volition to nature, and by this concession
has made it at once the material and the efficient cause of
creation, and hence the fallacy of its arguments. In the
third reason, however, the philosopher contradicts himself.
He has denied intelligence to nature, and yet asserts the
destination of each material object.

The great doctrine of causality, on which these arguments
depend, is thus put forward: the proofs that every effect is
produced by a cause which actually exists, are: that that
which does not exist cannot be the cause of anything what-
soever; that not everything is capable of doing anything,
but everything must be done by that which is fitted to do it,
and also that the character of the cause exists to a certain
extent in the effect.1 In other words, that which exists
cannot have been produced by what does not and never did
exist; but must have been produced by something gifted
with existence, and must therefore have a cause.

The existence of spirit, that is, of a rational being which
can comprehend matter and nature, the existence of which is
already proved, is likewise demonstrated in five ways:*—

1, The existence of matter, of the world, must have some
object; it cannot be merely uscless and accidental; and that
object cannot be itself, but some other, viz. the soul.

2. Everything which exists has a direct positive ‘opposite.

fir., sh 9. Kapila, ch. i.’sut. 38, 77, 110, age and 128.
Sfnk.-kar.,  Shl. 17, Kapila, ch. i. st, 66, 132—136.


===== PAGE 80 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. lxxix

Nature and matter are both under the influence of the
three qualities, and thus viewed may be considered as one.
Something must therefore exist as their opposite, not under
the influence of those qualities, and this something is
spirit.

8. The body moves and fulfils its functions according to
the laws of nature, but the variety of its actions in its re-
lations to matter require that there should exist that_which
can direct and prompt them,

4, Matter has qualities and attributes which fit it for
enjoyment; but since it is not the mere body which enjoys
them, there must exist something which does so.

5. From the existence of a conviction in every being of
his own possible existence distinct from the body, which is
evinced in the desire he feels to be set free from material
existence, and from mundane regeneration and transmigra-
tion, in which he learnt to believe, every one feels the
misery of this life, and is aware of its finiteness and muta-
bility, and desires to be quit of it. This proves the con-
sciousness in man of the possibility of liberation; of the
distinctness of the soul from matter; of the existence of
another non-material, and consequently eternal life; and
therefore of the eternity of the soul, since it is considered
impossible for a man really to desire complete annihilation.

These arguments are very poor, and we are therefore
pleased to find in Kapila (ch. vi. stit. 1) another which is
worth them all. He says, ‘The soul exists, because there is
no means of proving that it does not exist.’

The system has now been put forward, and its component
parts*proved, at least to the satisfaction of the philosopher,
to exist. Moreover, it has been shown that nature and
matter ate connected in the relative position of cause and
effect, while spirit is completely distinct from both, having
merely the character of a witness, an enjoyer and an em-
ployer of matter. ,


===== PAGE 81 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

‘We proceed to speak of spirit; and the first doctrine
established is the plurality, individuality, and personality of
souls, attempted to be proved in three ways:!—

1. The birth and death of each individual taking place at
different times seems to preclude the possibility of all souls
being one.

2. The difference in the actions of individuals proves a
different impulse in each, which suggests a distinct exist-
ence; for if all souls were the same, they would be prompted
to the same actions at the same moment.

8. The three qualities influence individuals in different
degrees, some being born with a greater amount of goodness,
some of badness, etc.

Independent of the poverty of these arguments, the truth
of each is doubtful. In the last, for instance, he has for-
gotten that elsewhere the influence of the three qualities
is said to be confined to matter, and that, therefore, the
difference of disposition proves nothing more than the dif-
ference of bodies.

The doctrine of the individuality of the soul is worthy of
particular notice, as being peculiar to this school. In the
Vedas, and the so-called philosophical works based ‘upon
them, one universal soul is supposed to pervade all material
bodies, while in other schools, and even in the Bhagavad-
Gité among them, this doctrine is not clearly marked, though
often evidently admitted.

The soul, thus shown to be individual, is also distinct from
the body,’ but it alone, and not the body, is really sensitive,
and the body alone, and not the soul, is really active? From
the union of the body with the soul, the body wrongly
appears to be sensitive, and the soul active. In making the
soul inactive, Kapila is undoubtedly in error accordihg to our

1 Sinkkir. ahi 18., Kapila cb. i sit, 141-148,
2 Kapila, ch. vi. sit. 2.
3 Stnk.-kér, shi, 20.


===== PAGE 82 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION, Jxxxi

extended notions of action, but it must be remembered that
he considered action as essentially material in its nature.
For every kind of action something besides the agent must
exist. There must be tools, instruments and organs, and
these belong to matter only. Action in the Sénkhya is not
mere volition or impulse, but must be achieved either by the
organs of action, the senses, or the heart, regarded as an
internal sense. It is therefore quite in keeping with his
theories to make the soul inactive, and in so doing he does
not deny activity to spirit ; and this leads us to speak of the
ideas of the pure Sankhya as to spirit.

Although no mention is made in the pure Sénkhya of a
spiritual essence, from which the soul emanates, and into
which it returns, there can be no doubt that Kapila had an idea
that such existed, from the fact of final emancipation being
the loss of the soul’s identity, which it only preserves while
connected with matter. This he has shown distinctly by
making the consciousness of that individuality an attribute
of matter. Moreover, in speaking of soul, sundry indica-
tions are given of the notion of their being all one and the
same, which, when placed by the side of their plurality on
which he insists, would be a most direct and bold contra-
diction, if we do not understand that he alludes rather to an
universal spirit from which the individual souls are emanated.
One instance will suffice (Kapila, ch. i. sit. 142 and 148),
where he compares the souls to the air in different vases,
which are the bodies; and adds, ‘that the receptacles (the
vases or bodies) are distinct, but not the air or spirit,
although, in one vase, the air may be hot or foul; in another,
cold or pure, and so on.’

Lastly, when we perceive in the system already described
that intélligence and consciousness are set down as parts of
matter, we must not be led away to the contlusion that soul
is on that account unintelligent or not personal. It must be
remembered that intelligence and consciousness, as conceded,


===== PAGE 83 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GITA.

to matter, refer solely to matter itself; intelligence is then
the faculty of perceiving, investigating, considering, and re-
flecting on matter; and it is true, though Kapila may not
have discovered it, that however intelligent our souls may be,
their intelligence during this life is undoubtedly limited to
the experience they derive from matter, and is incapable of
conceiving, imagining, or even comprehending those ideas
for which our experience has afforded us no precedent, such
as the existence of God as a pure spirit; or infinity, eternity,
and others. Again, since the soul, when once liberated from
matter, loses (according to Kapila’s theory) its personality
and identity, it is clear that consciousness can only belong to
it while united to matter; and though that consciousness
may be considered as a faculty of the soul, he is quite right
to make its vehicle and organ material.

To re-capitulate, the soul is considered by the SAnkhya as
eternal, emanating from and re-entering a spiritual essence ;
it is sensitive, rational, free from the direct influence of the
three qualities, distinct from nature and matter, its own
cause, individual, personal, gifted with volition, but inactive.

We have now seen the characters of the three principal
divisions of the system—nature, matter, and soul, generally
explained. A few observations must now be made on tho
nature of the details, that is, of the twenty-three categories
which compose matter in its development.

Intelligence (buddhi) has been already spoken of. It is
the first product of nature, and is placed in the closest con-
nection with the soul, and thus forms the link between it and
the body. It is, however, material; but while it cannot be
supposed to mean nothing but the actual brain, which is its
seat, it must not be limited to its’ faculties only, such as per-
ception, reflection, comparison, judgment, and imagination.
These are the inherent powers of the physical brain, but
they are only called into action when the soul is united to
the body.


===== PAGE 84 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. ixxxi

Consciousness (ahankdra) has also been explained as be-
longing to matter rather than to soul. It is the first product
of intelligencd; and this is correct; since, though the con-
sciousness of own individual existence may exist without any
connection with external matter, and though neither per-
ception, nor inference, nor even reflection, are requisite for
its existence, if cannot, as a faculty of matter, be called into
life unless thought has preceded it. Consciousness, the con-
viction of own existence, is strictly a thought, not a creation
of thought, if such a thing exists; not, to speak more strictly,
a mere kaleidoscopic arrangement of impressions already
received from without; not an idea or notion, but an ac-
companiment to thought, and a portion of thought itself.
It is this, too, which gives memory to the mind.

The heart (manas) is sensibility, the power of feeling,
the organs of which are the senses; while its changes, ac-
cording to the influence of the three qualities of good, bad,
and neutral, are its passions—love, hate, and indifference.'
It is the product of consciousness, and it is evident that there
can be no sensibility without personality. It is, at the same
time, an organ of action and an organ of perception. In
the former capacity, it is that which, prompted by desires, in
turn direéts the senses towards the objects in connection with
each. In the latter, it simply collects the impressions made
on the senses.

These three, intelligence, consciousness, and sensibility,
form a triad, which is considered as the internal organ of
perception. Its action is successive; the heart having re-
ceived impressions from the external organs of sensation,
transmits them to consciousness, which forwards them to
intelligence, which, being in immediate connection with the
soul, transfers them to it.?

) Sank.-kar., shl. 27. Kapila, ch. ii, stitras 27, 39, 40, and 41,
2 Sank.-kér. shls, 29 and 30.’ Kapila, ch. ii, edtras 29—31,


===== PAGE 85 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

The organ of sensation is the aggregate of the five senses,
which receive their impressions of external things directly
and spontaneously,! that is, by the connection of each sense
with its associated object of sense; and though the soul is
the only really sensitive thing, and the senses are merely
organs, still their action is in itself wholly independent of
the soul, and directed simply by the laws of nature; so that
even when the soul is withdrawn from the body, if the vital
function still remains to set them in action, the impressions
of external objects are still received; and this is supposed to
be the case in sleep. To this organ of sensation is added the
aggregate of the five organs of action, and the ten are then
regarded as one external organ. These are all the products
of consciousness; for, as parts of sensibility and individual
action, it is evident that they are dependent on personality.
The other products of consciousness are the elements and
subtile elements of matter, which will be treated of in the
physiological portion of the system.

By these organs of perception and action, both internal
and external, the soul is connected with matter, that is, with
the body itsclf and the external world? But what is the
object of this connection of soul and matter? Final emanci-
pation, the liberation of the soul from matter. Is then the
soul merely united to matter in order to be liberated from it?
If so, why was it ever united P why did it not always remain
an independent portion of the spiritual essence, rather than
become individual, simply with the object of losing that in-
dividuality again after a longer or shorter period of misery
in this life? Why are we born, if only to die? To these
three questions Kapila returns no answer; and it was left to
the Theistic Sankhya to point to one Supreme Being, and
reply that—such was his will. But he does not’ the less

» Sank.-kér., shl. 31.
? Sank.-kér, sbls, 31—36, Kapila, ch. ii, sttras 37—46,


===== PAGE 86 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION, Ixxxv

insist on the necessity of final emancipation being the cause
of the union of soul and matter, nor on the means that are
employed to effect that object. A multitude of souls have
been made to emanate from the spiritual essence; have, in
short, been individualized; while, at the same time, the
world, as we have seen it composed, has emanated from
nature. In the ordinary course of things these souls have
to retain their individuality as long as the world retains its
development. At its creation, each soul has been, firstly,
united with the lowest class of material body, which assumes
any distinct and independent form, such as even a stone or a
lump of earth. When, in the natural course of things, this
body has been dissolved into its elementary components, the
soul migrates to one of a higher class, as that of vegetable
bodies, and ascends in this manner, through fishes, reptiles,
quadrupeds, and so on, till it reaches a human body. Then,
but not till then, is the power granted it of working out its
own emancipation. Man is the turning-point in the scale of
beings. From him the soul may either ascend further to
gods and demigods, or again descend in the order in which
it hag ascended. But its transmigrations are now no longer
obedient to the laws of nature alone, but depend on the good
or bad path of life which man selects,

At this point of its individual existence, the great object
of the soul is to free itself from the necessity of either one
course of transmigrations or the other, and this liberation
can only be effected by emancipating the soul entirely from
matter, which is accomplished, says the S4nkhya, by per-
fection of knowledge. This knowledge is acquired through
the connection of the soul with matter, by means of the
internal and external organs of perception. To this it may
be replied that every man is gifted with these organs, and
that the simple use of them would therefore effect every
man’s emancipation ; while the same may be said of animals,
and, to a certain degree, of all organic matter. Why, then,


===== PAGE 87 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GITA.

cannot every man and every beast work out its emancipation
by the simple action of lifeP In order to answer this
question, a theory is introduced, which we have as .yet
merely noticed casually, but which is one of the most im-
portant in the whole system. It is that of the three qualities
(guna).

This theory, in its original simplicity, belongs to the age
of observation, rather than to that of investigation, and
cannot therefore be looked on as an invention of philosophy.
It required but little perspicuity for man to perceive that
some things in this world were good, excellent, useful, and
pleasant to himself; others, bad, obnoxious, disagreeable; and
others again, while they could not be considered as actually
obnoxious and disagrecable, still useless, and cumbersome,
and such is the theory in its primitive simplicity. Without,
however, going into a minute investigation of the period at
which the terms which we find in philosophy applied to these
three attributes of matter were first received, or the literal
and original signification of those terms,! we may safely say
that they belong to the age of philosophy, and that their
meaning, from whatever source derived, is there very, clear
and precise.

When the soul was clearly defined as distinct from the
body, and as belonging to an universal spiritual essence,
when it was felt that emancipation could be effected by
perfection, and that therefore the soul must be capable of

1 They are sattia, ‘goodness, rajas, ‘badness,’ and tamas, ‘indifference,’
Satta is the abstract substantive from sat, pres. part. of as, ‘to be,’ and meaning
therefore ‘being, existing’ thence ‘real’ as contrasted with what only appoars to
exist, and is false,—and hence ‘good.’ Sattwa therefore means ‘reality, good
ness.’ Rajas is 8 concrete subst., derived either from ranj, with the meaning of
‘colour,’ of from the same root with the meaning of ‘adhere to.’ In the first
place it would mean ‘colour’ as contrasted with goodness, which wat regarded as
‘tight’; in the second it would be that which attaches man to the world. Lastly,
tamae means simply ‘darkness, obscurity,’ whether as contrasted with light or
colour; and taken metaphorically to mean ihe darkness of ignorance and delusion,
In the Bhagavad-Gité, ch. xiv. ehl. 22, the three terms prakdsha, ‘light, clear-
ness,’ pravritts, ‘activity,’ and moka, ‘delusion,’ are substituted for the more
common ones,



===== PAGE 88 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. ixxxvii

perfection, it was set down that spirit could not be directly
affected by these qualities; for it was ere long perceived that
nothing which was affected even by the quality of goodness
was entirely perfect, but that the qualities belonged all three
to every existing thing, though the preponderance of any
one of them might give it the appearance of standing alone
without the other two. Perfection was impossible to matter,!
though possible to spirit; and since the three attributes
which belonged to matter were the reason of its incapability
of attaining perfection, it was clear that they could not
belong to spirit. But, if such were the case, how was it
that the dispositions and actions of men were so clearly
different, some being good, others bad, and others stupid or
useless ? The reply was, that those dispositions themselves
belonged to the different bodies, and not to the different
souls; and that those actions were prompted by the qualities
themselves. In the earliest ages of philosophy, knowledge,
with or without virtue, was considered the highest good :
ignorance, with or without virtue, the greatest evil: and
action, whether well or ill meant, since it was always at-
tended with consequences which could not be perfectly good,
as nothing material was so, but always contained more or
less of evil, was considered as bad. Sattwa, ‘ goodness,’
therefore became also enlightenment, knowledge, and was
free from action; rajas, ‘badness,’ was action itself and
worldliness ; famas, ‘ indifference,’ darkness, mental ob-
scurity, ignorance, was also free from action. But this
very freedom was bad in it, since it amounted to inertness,
sloth,.and indifference.

As has been said, these attributes were never single,
whether as forming the dispositions, or as influencing the
actions of beings. They were always united in different

1 Since the very nature of perfection precludes either qualification or variety,
which are attribpies of matter.


===== PAGE 89 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GITA.

proportions. A good disposition or a good action would be
influenced by a very large amount of goodness, with a small
quantum of badness, and a still smaller one of indifference ;
a bad disposition or action, by a preponderance of badness,
and so on.

These dispositions, however, were not the work of the
beings to whom they belonged, but were inherent and innate
in’ the different bodies, and according to their dispositions
the bodies were then arranged in different grades. Those
below, man, such as animals, plants, etc., had all a less
amount of goodness than of the other two qualities. They
were therefore devoid of that enlightenment, which would
enable them to discover the necessity of emancipation, and
thus no beings below man had the power of accomplishing
it. Again, in the beings above man, such as demigods and
gods, the dispositions had a preponderance of goodness, and
it was therefore possible for them to work out their per-
fection ; but as the life and death of man were beyond his
own power, so were those of the dcities; and destiny had
allotted them a term of existence which they had no means,
—and, since that existence was blessed, no desire,—to
shorten.

Though these deities and the beings inferior t¢ man were
ranged in divers classes according to their dispositions,
Kapila was sufficiently republican to make one class only
of all mankind. All men alike had the power of effecting
their own emancipation, but all men had not equal facilities,
nor the same inclination. The abject Shidra, the hated bar-
barian (mlechchha), and even the despised weaker gex, to
whom all advantages had been denied by the bréhman, re-
ceived the right from the Sénkhya and its followers! of
attaining eternity; but still their dispositions were indif-
ferent and obscure, and it was not probable that they would

1 See Bhagavad-Gité, ch. ix. shl. 32, note.


===== PAGE 90 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION.

accept and employ the privilege thus granted them. Thus
not only knowledge, but a wish and effort were requisite to
the attainment of emancipation, and the dispositions which
had been allotted (Kapila and his followers are silent as to
by whom they were allotted!) to the different bodies in which
the soul was born, had the power of suggesting the wish,
and facilitating the accomplishment. But allowing the wish
and the effort, if the perfection of knowledge was not at-
tained, what was the fate of the being? In order to-answer
this question, we must explain the theory of transmigration,
and in so doing we are led to an investigation of .

Tux PuystotocicaL Portion or THE Pure SANKHYA.

The cosmology of Kapila and his immediate followers is
divided into two principal portions, the material creation
(bhautika-sarga), and the intellectual creation (bhdva-sarga or
pratyaya-sarga), the former including ‘all external matter ;
the latter, the dispositions and minds of man.

The material creation is said to comprise three worlds.®
The first, or upper world, consists of the different regions of
divine and superhuman beings; the second, or middle world,
is that of man; and the third, or lower, is that of beings
inferior to man, including the demons, etc. In the first, the
quality of goodness predominates; in the second, that of
badness; in the third, that of blind indifference. The bodies
which inhabit these worlds are of fourteen kinds, also dis-
tributed in three classes—the superhuman, the human, and
the less than human.’

The »superhuman descends in the following eight di-
visions: —The bodies belonging to—1. Brahma-loka, the

1 Though it is generally understood that he ascribed their distribution and
arrangement to Nature; which, however, would concede, that, which he denied to
it, intelligence. It is another point which demands tho existence of a Supreme
Being, which the Theistic Sinkhya, Patanjali, and the Bhagavad-Gits have
supplied.

TPetnk.-kér., shl. 63, Kapila, ch. iii dt, 42,

» Sank.-kér., sbls. 54, 65. Kapila, ch. ili, sts, 43, 44,


===== PAGE 91 / 300 =====

ww BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

region of Brahmé, Vishnu, and Shiva, considered as the
superior deities. 2. Pitri-loka, that of the Pitris or Manes,
the Prajapatis or progenitors of mankind, and the Rishis,
3, Soma-loka, the region of the moon, and other heavenly
bodies. 4. Indra-loka or Swarga, the region of Indra and
the multitudes of secondary deities who own him as king.
5. Gandharba-loka, that of the heavenly minstrels and in-
habitants of the air. 6, Rékshasa-loka, that of one class
of mythological demons, 7. Yaksha-loka, that of another.
8. Pishdcha-loka, that of a third class of the same.

The human is single, containing man alone, without dis-
tinction of rank.

The less than human contains five divisions in the follow-
ing descending order—1. Domestic animals (pashu). 2. Wild
animals (mriga). 3. Birds. 4. Reptiles, fishes, and insects.
5. Vegetable and inorganic matter.

All these bodies are material, all liable to more or less of
pain, disease, ctc., from which not even the deities aro en-
tirely free, and into such bodies as these can the soul pass.
Man, as we sce, stands between the two other classes, and to
him accordingly is granted the power of ascending or de-
scending, or liberating himself entirely from life. If he
rigidly and piously performs the duties of his religion, and
leads an upright moral life; or if, abandoning the strict
letter of the law, he strives, though without success, to work
out his emancipation from the flesh;! his reward is to inhabit
one of the regions included between Brahma-loka and
Gandharba-loka, according to the superiority or inferiority
of his merits. After a sojourn in these regions propogtionate
to his dues, he is born again on earth, in a body superior to

his last, in which circumstances render emancipation more
easy of attainment, such as that of a member of some pious

1 Bhagavad-Gita, ch. vi. shls, 37-47. w-kér., shl. 44, Kapila, ch, iii,
ong RaNgTAG-Git, ch. vi, hs, 37-47. Sank.-Kér., shl. 44, Kapila, ch. it


===== PAGE 92 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xet

bréhman family, and so on. “If he does not, however, now
accomplish his liberation, he is carried after death to a
superior world, and born again in due season on earth ; and
this process is repeated as long as the being does not commit
great sins on earth, till he has effected his emancipation ; or,
failing that, till the dissolution of the world.

In the next case, that of a man whose life is neither good
enough for heaven nor bad enough for hell, the soul is im-
mediately born again on earth, in a better or worse body,
according to his deserts. .

Lastly, when a man’s life has been irreligious and immoral,
his soul is condemned after death to a sojourn of length pro-
portionate to his crimes in one of the regions of punishment
called Naraka; after which it is again enclosed in an earthly
body, either that of a low caste of human beings, or, if his
crimes were very great, that of some animal; and the re-
volving process continues till the dissolution of the world.

Such is the law of transmigration as defined by the schools,
and received by the established religion. Kapila admits this
law, but he does not see that in so doing he considerably
disturbs his own system. Some intelligent Being must exist
to allot the punishment, and to decide more accurately than
human justtce what is worthy of heaven, what of earth, what
of hell. If the arrangement and dispensation of these judg-
ments be referred to the action of nature, then nature must
not only be intelligent, which Kapila will not allow; but
must also be superior to spirit, which is distinctly denied.
In the Theistic Sankhya the Supreme Being accordingly
supplied the vacant place. In the established mythology
these increased powers were added to those of Yama, the
Lord of Judgment, who already figured as destroyer and
judge in the Epic triad.

But another difficulty in this system of transmigration
must be obvious to every reader. If these regions to which
the soul migrates are material, and consequently finite, how


===== PAGE 93 / 300 =====

xeii BHAGAVAD-GITA.

is it that in quitting this body at death, and passing on to
another body in another region, the soul is not emancipated,
since there is evidently no matter to detain it? or, again,
how can the soul, which is inactive, migrate at all from one
material region to another? This difficulty also presented
itself to the mind of Kapila, and, perhaps, even to still
earlier philosophers ; and a theory was introduced, which is
merely one of convenience, and cannot but be regarded with
severity. To accept, with but little inquiry, a false theory,
like that of transmigration, from a system of religion which
he despised, and then to support this with another false in-
vention, is unworthy of a philosopher; and in this, more
than in any part of his faulty physiological system, must
Kapila be blamed.

From the moment of its emanating from the spiritual
essence and its union with matter, the soul was supposed to
be invested with a subtile body, which it never quits till the
moment of final emancipation, or till the entire dissolution of
all matter takes place. This body,! called the Linga, or
linga-sharira? (lit. ‘the sign,’ i.e. the reflection or shadow of
the more substantial body), is the vehicle in which the soul
is borne from one region to another; thus solving the diffi-
culty. It is material, although imperceptible ; ¢t is coeval
with the soul, born with it, and ceasing to exist at its emanci-
pation; but never quitting it for a moment as long as it is
subject to material existence, no matter in what sort of sub-
stantial body the soul may be placed. Yet it does not change
its form in transmigration: in an animal, fish, fowl, beast, or
man, and in superhuman beings the /inga is still the same;
being, as it were, a spiritual body. It is composed” of the

1 Sankh.-kar., s§ls. 40-43. Kap., ch. iii. sGtras 1-16.

? A refinement, into which it is needless to enter, distinguishes these two terms.
‘The linga is that which we have here described it, but is in itself incapable of
sensation. It is called ativdhika. The linga-shartra, called anughtdna, is the
Grosser vehicle of the latter, though more eubtile than the actual corporeal’ body.


===== PAGE 94 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION, xeiti

following categories of developed matter, the five grosser
elements being alone excluded, viz. Buddhi, Ahankéra, and
Manas, the five subtile elements, the five senses, and the five
organs of action, so that it is capable both of action and
sensation. Perhaps the best idea which can be given of it is
to compare it with our own childish notions of ghosts, with
the phantoms or images of bodies in Greek superstition, and
with the mystic non-material body with which some of the
early Christians attempted, though evidently with error, to
explain the Resurrection. It cannot be called non-material,
since it was composed of the subtile elements, but it is in-
capable of direct affection from mattcr. Thus when the
substantial body is killed, the dinga which exists within it
remains unhurt as the coating of the soul.

The intellectual creation (pratyaya, or Lhava-sarga) is de-
scribed as follows. The mind of man is subject to three
kinds of error, viz.: .

1. Confounding the material essence with spirit, not

defining the limit between them.

2. Mistaking one of nature’s productions, such as in-

telligence, for the soul itself.

8. Supposing that emancipation can be attained by

religious practices.

When the three qualities affect the mind, they cause it to
range itself in the following fifty dispositions :|\—

Five kinds of Obstructions, viz. :

1. Obscurity, or error, is of cight kinds, according as
the mortal mistakes nature, intelligence, conscious-
ness, or one of the five subtile elements, for the
soul.

2. Bewilderment, or illusion (mohana), is of eight kinds,

Caused in attempting the eight ‘Kinds of super-

natural powers (vibhuti).

yshls 46-61. Kop., ch. iii. sitras 35-40.


===== PAGE 95 / 300 =====

BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

8. Great bewilderment, or extreme illusion, is of ten
kinds, caused by indulging each of the ten senses.

4. Gloom (tamas) is of eighteen kinds, resulting from
the two last, with the addition of malice.

5. Utter darkness is of eighteen kinds, being the samo
with the addition of fear.

Twenty-eight kinds of Disabilities, deficiency in the eleven
organs, such as blindness, deafness, etc., and the inability of
attaining the nine kinds of quietudes, and oight kinds of
perfections, which follow :

Nine kinds of Quietudes, or contentments, consist of four
internal and five external. The former are:

1. Calm expectation that nature itself will work out
our emancipation, and that it is needless for us
therefore to trouble ourselves.

2. The same feclings with regard to ascetic exercises.

8. The same with regard to time.

4. The same with regard to luck or accident.

The five external are abstinence from indulgence of tho
senses from the following temporal motives.

1. Because the trouble is too great. .

2. Because, when acquired, the difficulty of keeping is
too great. .

8. Reluctance to lose when once acquired,

4. On account of the bad consequences resulting from
fruition.

5. From fear of hurting the objects of enjoyment.

Eight kinds of Perfections are—

1—8. Direct prevention of the three kinds of eyil, viz.
internal or personal, external or accidental, and
superhuman.

4—8. Reasoning, oral instruction, study, conversation
with ‘friends on topics of philosophy and liberality
(or as Véchaspati Mishra has it, ‘purity,’ from a
Toot, dai, the word being ddna).


===== PAGE 96 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xcv

The divisions of mental modes or dispositions are systema-
tized with the evident object of explaining the action of the
three qualities on the intellect, and the consequent difficulties
in the way of attaining final emancipation. Thus the Obstruc-
tions would seem to imply chiefly the influence of the rajo-
guna, or quality of badness; the Disabilities and Quietudes
that of the ¢amo-guna, or quality of indifference; and the
Perfections that of the sattwa-guna, or quality of goodness.

Here the physiological portion and the whole of our ar-
rangement of the Sankhya system concludes; and as our object
in placing it before the reader is rather to aid in the compre-
hension of the philosophy of our poem, and to exemplify the
character of early speculative Indian philosophy, we leave it
to him to make his own criticisms on its imperfections and
shortsightedness, and again refer him to our authorities, more
especially to the Mémoire of M. Barthélemy St. Hilaire.

The physiological portion of his system undoubtedly re-
dounds little to the praise of Kapila’s clearsightedness. Too
much has been tacitly received from the superstitions of his
age, and too little attempt has been made to supply the place
of science. But when we call to mind that this ancient
thinker thought and taught af /east seven or eight centuries
before Chaist, amid superstition and ignorance of the darkest
nature, we must not lose sight of two points in his system,
which raise him far above the carlier speculators both of
Greece and modern Europe. The one is the establishment
of a fifth clement, the other the mistaken theory of the
subtile elements.

Up, to a recent period the existence of a void was still
a matter of discussion between the speculative and the
scientific. Among the former, Descartes and Leibnitz had
denied ‘it. Among the latter, Newton had proved it by
astronomical calculations. The barometer and the airpump
seemed indisputable confirmations of the truth of Newton’s
apparent proofs. Leibnitz had however suggested that im-


===== PAGE 97 / 300 =====

xevi + BHAGAVAD-GITA.

ponderable fluids, resembling those of light and electricity,
existing in the atmosphere, filled the space left by the re-
tirement of the air in these cases. Observations made on
the diminution of Euler’s comet have recently proved the
necessity of the existence of such fluids; and Herschel
himself, in admitting this fact, believes that Newton was
mistaken, in spite of the apparent exactness of his calcu-
lations, which arose from the extreme rarity of the fluid in
which the heavenly bodies move.

But what Descartes and Leibnitz could assert in the six-
teenth century after Christ—what Newton with the minutest
calculations has failed to disprove—a simple Brahman some
seven or eight centuries before Christ could assert in the
clearest manner, amid the profoundest ignorance of science.
The dkdsha, the imponderable subtile fluid of Kapila, which
fills all space, and also forms an ingredient of all matter, is
undoubtedly a discovery worthy of acknowledgment.

Again, when the earlier thinkers of Greece could discover
no finer elements of matter than the four obvious com-
ponents, earth, air, water and fire, Kapila had already gone
further. His five components of mattcr are not elements,
the mahdbhiténi were merely gross material aggregates, and
the elements of which these were composed were of a
subtile and imperceptible character. The grosser elements
were merely the five apparently distinct forms under which
matter commonly meets the view. The finer clements
(tanmdtrdni) were the essences of these which really con-
nected them with the senses. The greatest cause of wonder
in the Sdnkhya system is that these elements should be
actually produced by material consciousness (ahankéra); but
to investigate this mystery would be to enter into a dis-
cussion on the real character of consciousness, and the vague
ideas of illusivegcreation (mdyd), which would here be both
useless and tedious, even if I were, which I confess I am not,
prepared to explain Kapila’s ideas, if indeed he ever had any,
on that subject.


===== PAGE 98 / 300 =====

PART IV.
THE YOGA, OF PATANJALI.

We have already stated our belief, that the imperfections in
Kapila’s system had given rise to the formation of a Theistic
S4nkhya school; and we have further (cide Part II.) at-
tempted to explain the causes which led to the moulding of
that system into the Yoga, of Patanjali. Philosophy was
gradually acquiring more followers than the established
religion. The Theistic Sankhya offered a new god; but no
form of worship had been hitherto prescribed for him.
Knowledge was still the means of obtaining emancipation ;
but the means of acquiring that knowledge were unsatis-
factory. Asceticism, mortification of the flesh, contemplation,
and a solitary life, were already the fashion among the

religious classes. Patanjali discovered in these practices an
excellent casing for the Sankhya, and resolved to reduce the
former to a system, and the latter to a practical religion. If
the Pure Sénkhya be the speculative, the Theistic Sankhya
the theological, and the Karma Yoga of the Bhagavad-Gita
the ethical, the Yoga of Patanjali must be looked upon as
the practical adaptation of the Sankhya system.

We have stated our reasons for believing this school to be
posterior to the revolution of Buddha; but, at the same time,
we cannot deny its remote antiquity. As a proof of this,
the Hindis themselves place its foundation in the Satya
Yuga, the firat and golden age of the world; and there is
every reason to believe that it preceded the Bhagavad: Cité
by several centuries.

Its founder, Patanjali, is known to us by name only, He
is sometimes called an incarnation of Ananta, the serpent-


===== PAGE 99 / 300 =====

xevill BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

king; but it is difficult to account for the fuble. Again he
is, by native commentators of a late date, said to be the son
of Angiras and Suti, and to have married Lulipé, whom he
found in the hollow of a Vata tree; a fable intended to
symbolize some notion about his doctrines. What we do
know for certain in nowise enlightens us: namely, that an
author or authors of the same name, and sometimes con-
founded with the philosopher, wrote a large grammatical
treatise, entitled ‘Mah4bhéshya,’ a commentary on the
Grammar of P&nini; and a medical one called ‘ Charaka.’

But if we know little about the founder, we are not much
wiser in regard to his writings. From the Bhagavad-Gité
wo can conjecture what must have been their tenor, and with
the little aid we possess, we can define at least sufficiently
the nature of his doctrines. His Suitras—for he is of suf-
ficient antiquity to have employed Stitras or philosophical
aphorisms—bear the name of Sankhya-pravachana, the same
as that of Kapila’s principal work. They are one hundred
and ninety-cight in number, and are distributed into four
parts. Commentaries on them are ascribed to Vachaspati
Mishra, Panchashikha and Bhojadeva.

As regards their contents, our only authorities are Cole-
brooke,' who merely mentions them very briefly; Ward,?
who gives lengthy details from Bhojadeva’s commentary, for
many reasons of very doubtful value; and Windischmann,>
who would seem to draw his information from Ward.

The word Yoga belongs less as a title, than in its abstract
sense, to the age of the Siitras themselves. Derived from
the radical yj, ‘to join,’ ‘unite,’ its literal meaning is

‘junction,’ ‘union.’ Used in a special philosophical sense
it signifies ‘a state of spiritual or mental junction with the
Supreme Being ;’ and refers to that ultimate cohdition of

1 Miscellancous Essays, vol. i. p. 236, ote,—Essay on the Sinkhya,
2 Views of Hindostan, vol. i. p. 377.
2 Geschichte der Philosophio, vol. i, p. 1878,


===== PAGE 100 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xeIx

spiritualism, which is attained by ascetic contemplation, and
which we have already mentioned as jivanmukti, or a state of
absorption into the Supreme Being even during this life,
which resembles final emancipation. This is the true mean-
ing of Yoga, as an end. As a means, its sense is more
limited. It is rather the mental union; the placing of our
thoughts on the Supreme Being; and, in short, as we have
rendered it throughout the Bhagavad-Gité,—Devotion.

The four chapters of the Yoga Stitras contain the following
treatises :—

1. On contemplation, or the concentration of thought

(samadhi).

2. On the means of obtaining the same (samddhiprapti).

3. On transcendental powers acquired by the same (vibhuti).

4, On the ecstatic abstraction or isolation of the soul

(kaivalya).
From this it is seen, that while the Sankhya contents itself
with ,indicating the means of attaining final emancipation,
the Yoga points out the way to obtain that means, and the
process of effecting final emancipation by it.

In ,the first chapter, contemplation is described as two-
fold:—First. Samprajnata, the first exercise of contemplation,
in which feason still works; but the object of which is to
destroy the consciousness of one’s individual existence, and
to bring the mind to that state, in which it is entirely
oblivious of the reality of all external matter, and is con-
vinced that the soul is actually connected and united with
the Supreme One. The objects towards which this con-
templagion is directed are cither nature, comprising the
whole universe, or one’s own soul, It is then divided into
the following four stages :—

1, As to the distinction between the name of a thing
and the thing named. The interdal repetition of
the name, accompanied by conception of the thing
named, until at last all distinction is lost between


===== PAGE 101 / 300 =====

e BHAGAVAD-GITA.

the name and the thing named; so that when the
Yogin, or practiser of Yoga, internally pronounces
the word Ishwara, or Deity, the name of the
Supreme Being, he may have the form of that
Being vividly pictured on his mind.

2. Losing by constant practice all distinction of form,
time, and place; so that he may imagine and
eventually believe himself to be any thing, at any
time and any where.

3. The constant association of Nature (pratriti), and
Spirit (purwsha), until he imagines the latter only
to exist in every thing, loses the sense of the
existence of matter generally, and of his own body
in particular, and thus becomes mentally bodiless
(videha).

4, A stage in which his own individual existence
(ahankdra) appears to be a mere reflection on his
sensibility (manas), and the Supreme Being alone
is manifest.

Second. Asamprajnata. Contemplation in which reason is
lost sight of; a complete restraint of the action of thought; the
last stage of mental abstraction; in which even the reflection
of his individual existence is lost sight of, and he ts mentally
one with the Supreme Being.

These are the stages of contemplation which lead to final
emancipation. The first steps towards entering on these
stages are three:

1. The abandonment of all worldly interests, hopes,
desires, love or hate; by means of which the Yogin, or
devotee, overcomes the five obstacles to Yoga, viz. pain,
grief, trembling, asthmatic breathing, and sighing.

2. Prénéy4ma, a peculiar exercise, which consists in re-
straining the Breath, sometimes performed by closing the
right nostril with the thumb, while breath is inhaled through
the left, then closing both, and at length opening the right


===== PAGE 102 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. a

nostril in order to cxhale, and so on. During this exercise,
his thoughts should be fixed on the localities of the organs of
sense, such as the tip of the nose, the point of the tongue,
the drum of the ear, etc., until he identifies these with the
Supreme Being. Again, he should place his thoughts on
external visible objects, such as the sun, the moon, fire, etc.,
or within his own heart, or at the bottom of his throat or
the centre of his skull. The heart is the supposed seat of
the soul, and its supposed passage at death is through the
coronal artery passing through the throat to the centre of
the skull, and thence on a beam of the sun, to the moon,
through fire up to the sun, and so on, to the Supreme Being.
By fixing his thoughts on these localities, he imagines that
his soul is actually taking this final journey, and is thus
mentally emancipated.

8. In muttering the names and attributes of the Deity, he
should so completely associate them -with the Being they
indicate, that he at last finds himself mentally in the
presence of that Being.

In the second chapter, it is shown that these exercises
prepare the Yogin for perfect knowledge (rijudna), which is
further acquired by the following eight stages of Yoga :—

I. Yama, or self-government, is of five kinds :—

1. Freedom from any wish to injure others.

2. Truth in reference to words and thoughts.

3. Freedom from appropriation of others’ property, in
thought, word or deed.

4, Tho subjection of one’s members, in order to over-
come desire.

5. Renunciation of all indulgence of pleasure.

II. Wiyama, or self-restraint, is of five kinds :—

1. Purity of mind and body.

2. Cheerfulness under all circumstances.

8. Religious austerity.

4, The repetition of incantations.


===== PAGE 103 / 300 =====

cu BHAGAVAD-GITA.

5. The association of all religious ceremonies with the
Supreme Being.

III. Asana, the ascetic posture, admits of eighty-four
varieties, each more uncomfortable than the last, but
in which the Yogin must by degrees become quite
easy.

IV. Préndydma, restraint of the breath, already described.

V. Pratyéhdra, complete control over the senses and
organs. Exclusive meditation on the Supreme Being,
and the withdrawal of the senses from all external
objects, compared in the Bhagavad-Gité to the tor-
toise gathering its limbs together under its shell.

These exercises are continued into the third chapter, which
afterwards treats of the transcendental powers (vibhiti) ac-
quired by them.

VI. Dhérana, steady, immoveable abstraction.

VII. Dhydna, exclusive meditation on the Supreme Being.

VIII. Samddhi, continual concentration of thought, by
means of which all external objects, and even one’s
own individuality are forgotten, and the mind fixed
completely and immoveably on the One Being.

These last three exercises constitute sanyama, or perfect
concentration; and when the Yogin has arrived at perfection
in them, he obtains innumerable superhuman powers, of
which the following twenty-five are enumerated :—

1. Knowledge of past, present, and future things.

2. By fixing his mind on words, knowledge of uni-
versal sciences.

8. By the same on the lines in his hands, knowledge
of his former states of existence.

4. On the hearts of others, knowledge of their
thoughts. .

5. On hig own person, invisibility of form.

6. On his own actions, knowledge of their future con-
sequences,


===== PAGE 104 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. cm

7. On compassion and sympathy, a fooling of benefi-
cence to all beings.
8. On strength, perfect strength.
9. On the sun, the power, like it, of viewing all
things.
10. On the moon, knowledge of astronomy.
11. On the polar star, knowledge of the constellations.
12. On the heart and stomach, knowledge of anatomy.
18. On the bottom of the throat, freedom from-hunger
and thirst.
14, On the nerve in the throat, called kurmi, rigidity of
posture.
15. On the universality of Mfanas, knowledge of all
invisible objects.
16, On the seat of the mind, knowledge of the thoughts,
past, present, and future, of himself and others.
17. On the state of a Yogin when emancipated, know-
ledge and sight of the spirit umassociated with
matter.

In the last chapter the kairalya, or state of emancipation
even during life is described. This is the yiranmukti, of
which we have already spoken. It is the highest state of
Yoga before the soul is actually re-absorbed into the Supreme
Being. The body still exists, and of course the soul exists
within it, but its connection with it is supposed to be entirely
broken, and the soul can consequently quit and re-enter the
body, and wander about where and as it lists. In this con-
dition it is supposed to attain the remaining eight trans-
cendentgl powers (eithiti).

18. The power of entering a living or dead body and
causing it to act as if it were its own.

19. Extreme lightness.

20. Resplendent brilliancy. :

21. The power of hearing sound, however distant, even
from the other worlds.


===== PAGE 105 / 300 =====

civ BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

22. Of transforming himself into each or all of the five
elements.

23, Of passing and penetrating anywhere.

24. Of changing the course of nature.

25. Of final liberation.

These last are variously given, and the following names
will spare us the trouble, and the reader the tedium, of
examining these variations. 1. Animd, extreme minuteness;
2. Layhimd, lightness; 3. Prdpti, attainment of any object ;
4. Prékémya, falfilment of every wish; 5. Mahimd, size;
6. Ishité, supremacy ; 7. Vashitd, power (over nature); 8.
Kamacashayitd, attainment of every wish.

The Yogin thus passes through four principal stages.

1. He learns the rules of Yoga.

2. He acquires perfect knowledge.

3. He employs this knowledge practically, and over-
comes the material influence of the primary
elements.

4. He destroys all consciousness of personality and
individuality (ahankdra); and the soul thus be-
comes free from matter.

Such are the details given by Ward and Windischmann
of Patanjali’s doctrines. If any reliance can be placed on
them, we cannot refrain from pronouncing on the whole
system at least a verdict of mysticism; but before these
details be verified, it is scarcely fair to enter on any criticism
on the Yoga of Patanjali. It will be sufficient to point out,
what every one will have already remarked, the great re-
semblance between these theories and the modern ideas of
magnetism and mesmerism. The power of the mind, and
still more of the will, over the body, is too well known and
ascertained to require even exemplification; but such it
receives in the:miracles fabled to be performed, and literally
performed, even to this day, by the Yogins and Fakirs of
India; and in the Middle Ages by the fanatics of France,


===== PAGE 106 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. cv

Italy, and Germany. That a man, in a complete state of
mental abstraction, and after continual habituation and exer-
cise of his body, should undergo without flinching, without
perhaps, a pang, what would insure death under all ordinary
circumstances, may be explained; but that the same ab-
straction and the same exercises should give transcendental
powers to the soul or even to the mind, even less marvellous
than those arrogated for it by the Indian philosopher, is a
subject of continual doubt, which every Christian, at least,
will approach with care. In no country but contemplative
India could such doctrines have been received at such an
age, or such exercises practised with faith. But that they
were received and followed out by multitudes, there can be
little doubt: and we have already attempted (Part II.) to
describe the ‘evils which resulted from their popularity, and
gave rise to the more human system of the Bhagavad-Gita.

It is a subject, of which we would fain know more; for, if
we divest it of its mysticism, we may venture to say that
there would be found much truth at the bottom. If we
arrogate for the Sénkhya the honour of having systematized
philosophical theories at an age when Greece could boast of
nothing more advanced than a Lycurgus, or of anticipating
by some thr&e-and-twenty centuries the denial of a void in
the enlightened West, we may at least call Patanjali the
Mesmer, and more than the Mesmer of India. Sufficient
praise be it to the mystic old Brahman to have inferred amid
darkness and ignorance the vast powers of the mind and the
will, and to have claimed for the soul the noble capability of
making the body and even external matter its slave.


===== PAGE 107 / 300 =====

PART V.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE BIAGAVAD-GITA.

Or the many parts which this wonderful production plays,
the principal is undoubtedly that of a didactic work; and we
have already attempted to point out (see Part IT.) the causes
which necessitated its composition as such. But, though a
Brahman and a reformer of national evils, its author was no
less a philosopher ; not only ethical, but to a certain degree
metaphysical and speculative; and his theories are the more
interesting, as embodying in full the theological ideas of the
Theistic Sankhya, for which, indeed, we have no other direct
authorities. ;

The work itself contains cighteen chapters and seven
hundred shlokas; and it has been suggested with much
semblance of truth, that the distribution into chapters or
readings (adhydya) was the work of the author himself, and
not of a later arranger, as the subject in almost all cases
terminates with the chapter which treats of it; and the
original point of didactic doctrine, the necessity for Arjuna
to fight, concludes each. And, indeed, if we reflect at what
a thoroughly literary and civilized age its author must have
existed, we shall not only be inclined to accept this sug-
gestion; but even to believe that the original length and
original form’ of the whole poem were such as we have
received them without a single interpolation. Passages
have, indeed, been pointed out, which bore marks of in-


===== PAGE 108 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. evn

congruity in their tendency ;' but when we recall the con-
ciliatory and Bréhmanical character of the author, even
these may be easily accounted for.

But another division is made, which may or may not have
been intended by the author, however useful to the reader.
The whole work has been divided into three parts, each of
six chapters. The first has been considered the purely
practical portion, containing the principal doctrines for the
practice of Yoga generally, and more particularly “for its
adoption in the routine of every-day life; and may be said
to follow Patanjali’s, rather than any other school. The
second portion is purely theological, and displays the theories
of the Theistic Sankhya school, which we presume to have
pre-existed. The third is the speculative or metaphysical
portion, and follows more closely in the footsteps of Kapila
and the pure Sinkhya. Thus the doctrines of the three pre-
ceding branches of the Sinkhya system are united in this
the fourth; though cach, of course, with the necessary
modifications of a new school. As to the exactness of this
division, it may be said that the Bhagavad-Gité is a poem ;
and that system is everywhere sacrificed to poetical effect.
Thus the first and second chapters introduce the whole
system in fts principal points without any arrangement ;
and in the course of a conversation, or rather discussion, on
the duty incumbent on Arjuna as a Kshatriya; while the
eighteenth recapitulates most of the chief ethical dogmata ex-
pounded throughout the poem. In other respects the division
is generally, though not strictly, observed,

The author of this poem has done well to introduce the
most prominent and important features of his doctrine early

' Schlegel, for instance, has suggested the introduction (sh. 1-5) to chapter xv.
Humboldt regards xvii. 23-28, in the same light. To myself xv. 15, seems to
be irreconcileable with the context ; but it must be romembered, that in all these

sages it is rather the sense than the language which is incongruous, as the
Ritter ‘can nowhere be referred to a later or earlier date,


===== PAGE 109 / 300 =====

evi BHAGAVAD-GITA.

in the work, and to preserve the less alluring and profounder
theories for the middle and end. But, in treating it as a
philosophical treatise, we must preserve the order which we
have already sought to impress on the mind of the reader, as
that which chronology, together with the natural sequence,
demands. The order of the poom must be reversed, and the
last six chapters, which treat of the speculative or pure
Sankhya, be first examined,

No very logical order is here observed. The thirteenth
chapter takes a general view of the cosmogony of the
S4nkhya in a very brief form, and proceeds to an analysis of
matter and spirit, the connection between them, and the
means of obtaining emancipation as put forward by Kapila,
namely, knowledge. The fourteenth is confincd to a treatise
on the three qualitics, and their influence on matter, directly,
and on soul, indirectly. In the fifteenth, spirit is investi-
gated, but on an entircly new system, following neither the
Pure nor the Theistic Sankhya. The sixteenth treats of the
dispositions allotted to the different kinds of souls. In the
seventeenth, the influence of the tliree qualities on religious
faith and worship generally is shown. The eighteenth offers
a recapitulation of the Karma Yoga doctrines, and a con-
firmation of the worship of Krishna, as identifiéd with the
Supreme One.

The thirteenth chapter opens with a brief announcement
of the twenty-five categories of matter :—Nature (prakriti
or avyakta), iptelligence, consciousness (ahkankdra), the eleven
senses (which comprise the heart (manas), the five organs of
perception and the five of action), the five grossereand the
five subtile elements, to which are now added the seven
passions or changes of the heart.! This constitutes the body.
The soul is first declared to be a portion of the Supreme

Bhogavad-Git6, chap. xiii. shls. 5, 6.


===== PAGE 110 / 300 =====

INLRODUCLION. cx

Being (xiii. shl. 2). It alone is gifted with sensibility, while
matter only is capable of action (shl. 20). The spirit is in
itself incapable of affection by the three qualities, but when
united to the body is indirectly affected by them (shl. 21).
Nature and spirit are both eternal, and it is by the conjunc-
tion of these two essences, each of them portions of the
Supreme Being, that all matter is caused to emanate from
the material essence (shls. 19 and 27). _

Knowledge is the means by which emancipation is effected.
But knowledge consists firstly in the investigation of spirit.
Comprehension of matter is within the power of all to
acquire by the use of senses; but, since spirit is invisible,
it can only be understood by a certain method of compari-
son, inference, and revelation, which constitutes philosophy.
Spirit, therefore, is the chief object of philosophical enquiry ;
and this spirit must be understood to be that which, gifted
with intelligence, is alone capable of comprehending matter.
It is, speaking generally, and not of either individual spirit
or of the Supreme Being separately, eternal and universal,
gifted with all faculties, free from all external influence of
matter, free from qualities; aid both capable of independent
existence, and of union with matter. It is this which, by its
intelligence, perceives, sustains, and regulates unintelligent
matter (shls. 12-22).

The acquirement of knowledge, as a system, consists
chiefly in humility and purity of heart, in self-government
and restraint of the senses, in general equanimity and
stoicism, devotion to the Supreme Being, solitary contem-
plation gnd internal investigation (shls. 7-11).

Such are the chief points of the Sankhya as viewed
through the Bhagavad-Gité But a further investigation
takes place into spirit, viewed generally. It is regarded as
being of three kinds, all closcly connected, axd indeed more
properly forming but one spirit regarded under three dif-
ferent aspects. .


===== PAGE 111 / 300 =====

ox BHAGAVAD-GITA.

The first is the Supreme Being himeelf,' who, though he
contains within him the essence of all matter, is, in his per-
sonality, regarded as spirit. The third is individual soul,?
which emanates from him. But the second? in rank is not
so easy to understand, or account for. An universal spirit is
supposed to exist throughout all matter, which is not that
spiritual essence itself from which souls emanate, but itself
an emanation from that essence; and apparently rather a
spiritual, or perhaps vital, energy than actual spirit. It
would seem to have been introduced by our poet, in his usual
spirit of conciliation, as a modification of the doctrine in the
Vedas of the universal spirit which was the soul in every
body and the vital energy in all matter. This doctrine was
a denial of the individuality and personality of souls, since
all souls were thus supposed to be one and the same in
different bodies, which Kapila and his followers distinctly
denied; although he admitted that there was a connection
between all souls which proved their common origin, and
that this common origin was the spiritual essence. It is,
therefore, in the endeavour to reconcile Kapila’s theory with
the universality of soul, supposed to be expressed by the
Vedas, that our author introduces this third kind of spirit.
He has already established the individuality and ‘personality
of souls agreeably to Kapila; he now adds an universal
spirit, which is independent of individual souls, but pervades
and enlivens all matter, and even exists in man as the vital
energy which sets in motion the corporeal faculties, con-
sciousness, and intelligence (ch. xv. shl. 15). This is added
as a substitute for the universal spirit of the Vedas; and if
such be the case, we can the more readily understand the
words of ch. xv. shl. 15, which might then be rendered,
‘And I alone am to be known by all the Vedas.’ This

: ‘

1 Bhagavad-Gita, ch. xv. shls. 17-20.  ? Bhagavad-Gita, ch. xv. shls. 7-11.
* Bhagavad-Gits, ch. av. shia. 1216.70


===== PAGE 112 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. oxi

spiritual or vital energy is that which lends to each material
object its peculiar preéminent quality; and to this aspect of
the Supreme Being does the author probably allude in his
description of the universality of that Being in ch. x.

The individual soul is a portion of the Supreme Being
which emanates from him and unites with the material body,
thus immediately becoming connected with external matter,
and receiving a mundane personality. It is imperceptible to
the vulgar eye, but the philosophic and devoted can perceive
it through the mind’s eye, since the material faculty of in-
telligence, when once connected with the soul, has the two-
fold power of perceiving matter and spirit. These two kinds
of spirit (purusha), the universal and individual, are called
the indivisible (akshara), and the divisible (Ashara), and are
said to exist in the world (ch. xv. shl. 16); that is, they
emanate from the Supreme Being only to be connected with
matter, and when matter is finally dissolved, they are re-
absorbed into his bosom. But the highest kind of spirit,
superior to both of these, as the whole is superior to the part,
is the Supreme Being himself, who has no connection with
matter, except as its creator, master, sustainer, and regulator.

In speaking of these three kinds of spirit, it will be seen
that Krishfia speaks of individual soul in the third person,
while he identifies the universal spirit and the Supreme
Being with himself, by using the first person. By this it is
seen that no personality is allowed to the universal spirit,
which is closely identified with the Supreme Being, and
should therefore be considered rather as the Supreme Being
himeelf jn his character of pervader and enlivener of matter,
than as an individual emanation from him.!

So much for spirit generally. As regards the nature of

1 Tt may be useful to mention here, what the reader wobla soon discover for
himself in studying the poem, that wherever Krishna uses the first person, he
means to speak of the Supreme Being with whom he is identified, ‘The excep-
tions to this rule are few, and will be noticed where they occur.


===== PAGE 113 / 300 =====

cexu BHAGAVAD-GITA.

the Supreme Being as a deity and object of worship, we
must not encroach on the second portion of the Bhagavad-
Git& at present; but we may say that, philosophically, he is
considered to be twofold, comprising the essence of matter
and the essence of spirit. The latter is, of course, the
superior portion, spirit being in everything superior to
matter, and is therefore considered as the male, while the
material essence is considered the female; and the result of
their conncction at the will of spirit is the emanation of the
universe from the female. The will of the spirit is thus
likened to the seed reposed within the womb of the material
essence, which, impelled by it, gives birth to matter. In
this case the deified material essence, being a portion of the
Supreme Being, is itself called Brahma (neut.), the name
generally given to the Supreme Being as a whole and in his
personality, but here! confined to this portion of him. Thus
the Supreme Being is both the matcrial and efficient cause of
creation. He cannot make anything out of nothing. The
great principle of causality, estublished by Kapila, denies
the possibility of something which cxists being produced
even by a Supreme, all-powerful, Being, out of nothing. As
the pot is made of carth, and the earth again of certain
subtile elements, which again are produced out of material
consciousness, which is a product of nature; so must nature
itself be either produced by something elsc, or be eternal,
and have no beginning. The latter alternative is preferred.
Nature is made eternal. But spirit is also cternal. If, then,
nature and spirit were independent of one another, they
would both be gods; but this is avoided by uniting them
in one Supreme Being, and thus making nature, or the
material essence, a portion of the great eternal Deity.

In so doing, tho Hindu philosophers of the ‘Theistic
Sankhya schoo] were guided by reason rather than con-

4 Viz. ch. xiv, shl. 3.


===== PAGE 114 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION, ex

science, and were quite unprovided with revelation. Con-
science and revelation taught the antediluvian races, and
Moses himself, who has handed it down to ourselves, that
the law of causality is merely a law of matter, made by God
himeelf for matter, but can go no farther. Matter itself, as
we believe, has no material cause, and needs none. Tho
Supreme Being whom we worship is really all-powerful, and
is not subject to the laws which He himself has made for
matter. He is able to create anything out of nothing; and
His will causes to exist what did not exist in any form what-
ever. Such, alone, can be the true character of a Supreme
Being; and, in the notion put forward by the Theistic
Saukhya philosophers, this character is denied to their
Supreme One, and his supremacy therefore removed, since
his power is not sufficient to rise above a law of nature.

We now proceed with our author to consider the im-
portant question of the origin of good and evil, and their
consequences to man. In speaking here of good, it must be
understood to be imperfect. The goodness which belongs to
the Supreme Being is a positive quality; it is perfection,
and is therefore capable of no direct opposite. The goodness
which belongs to matter, and is consequently within the
reach of nfun, is a comparative quality only: it is imperfect,
and only good according to our notions of superiority and
inferiority ; but, when regarded with spiritual eyes, must
be considered as really bad, since perfection alone is really
good, and all imperfection more or less bad. Perfection is,
therefore, the object of the devotee ; and, when he attains
it, he ig emancipated from the flesh, because he is fit for
re-absorption in the Supreme Being, who alone is perfect.
But the three qualities of goodness, badness, and indifference
must all'alike be avoided, for they all alike hinder perfection.
They spring from, belong to, and effect natute, the material
essence. But it would seem that their production is only
coeval with the emanation of matter from nature, and that,


===== PAGE 115 / 300 =====

cxiv BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

though nature is eternal, these qualities do not eternally
effect it, since in that case imperfection would be the at-
tribute of nature, and since the latter is a portion of the
Supreme Being, that Being would be capable of imperfection,
and therefore could not be perfect.

These three qualities (guna) working on the heart are the
real cause of all actions both internal and external, mental
and physical. For, as has already been explained in speaking
of the Sdnkhya system (Part III.), their effect is always
united, never single, but varying according to the pre-
dominance of each of the three. Thus, when goodness
predominates, although it is in itself inactive, it receives
the appearance of being active from its union with badness,
which is active. It then prompts good—that is, upright,
legally, morally and religiously good—actions. Its influence
on the soul is to enlighten it, and convey pleasure to it, and
thus when a mortal dies under the predominant effect of this
quality, his soul migrates to the upper regions, the worlds of
the deities. The quality of badness predominating, prompts
bad actions; the only impulse and object of which are selfish-
ness, self-interest, and mundane desires. The soul is, thus
blindly attached to the world; and, consequently, when a
mortal dies in this state, he is immediately born ‘again in a
body which has the same kind of disposition. The quality
of indifference prompts actions which are neither upright,
nor have a selfish object; but are totally without sense or
reason, and its effect on a being is to induce sloth, unwilling-
ness to act at all from sheer laziness, and a species of ignorant
folly, which is considered the lowest possible condjtion of
man. When, therefore, he dies under the influence of these
qualities, he suffers torment in Naraka, and is afterwards
born again in the body of some animal.

The effect of the three qualities on man is further ex-

' For the details, see ch. xiv. rhls, 5-20.


===== PAGE 116 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. cxv

emplified in his religion. This consists generally of three
parts, which constitute both the spirit and the practice of
religion,—worship or sacrifice, self-government or mortifica-
tion, and charity both in heart and deed. In other words,
religion consists of one’s duty to God, one’s duty to one’s
self, and one’s duty to one’s neighbour. .The inward and
spiritual duty to God is devotion or mental worship, which
is outwardly manifested in sacrifice. The duty to self is
to accomplish one’s own salvation, which is aided by self-
government, outwardly manifested in mortification of the
flesh, whether of word, thought or deed. The duty to one’s
neighbour is goodwill, charity, love and kindness; and this
is outwardly manifested in liberality and almegiving. Such
constitutes good religion. But the mere practice of these
duties is often employed with interested motives, and they
then become bad. Thus sacrifice or réligious ceremonies
may be hypocritically performed with a false show of piety ;
mortification may be severely carried out for the sake of
the support and hospitality accorded to Tapaswins, or self-
torturers; while alms may be given in the hope of being
amply, rewarded at some future time. When, again, these
religious offices are performed carelessly, irregularly, sense-
lessly, and* without any internal feeling corresponding to
them, they are then said to be under the influence of the
quality of indifference.! Again, the good worship the deities;
the bad worship evil demons, who willingly pander to their
evil desires; and the indifferent, actuated by low super-
stitious fear, worship ghosts and shades (ch. xvii. shl. 4),
The effect of the three qualities on man is further exempli-
fied in the disposition or character attached at birth to the
body, or according to the pure Sankhya ideas to the mi-
gratory body (Linga-sharira), which accompanies the soul
from its first conjunction with matter till the moment of its

\ See ch. xvii..11-22,


===== PAGE 117 / 300 =====

exvl BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

final emancipation. In either case these dispositions affect
souls through the medium of the flesh. They are considered
to be of two kinds, good and bad; the former tending
towards the gods, and thence called divine, the latter called
infernal, as tending towards the demons. With one or other
of these dispositions every man is born, and it then becomes
his duty to combat the bad, or to cherish and improve the
good. But if he neglect to do so, a good disposition becomes
bad, or a bad one still worse; occasioning his punishment in
Naraka, and regeneration in the body of an animal ; whence
he sinks lower and lower in the scale of bodies, and is at last
united with inorganic matter till the final dissolution. If,
on the other hand, he combats a bad disposition successfully,
he may be transported at death to the regions of the just, or
the worlds of the deities; while, if born with a good dis-
position, he cherishes and improves it, the working out of
his emancipation becomes easier to him. Thus we see in
this theory the same divine will, or, as some are pleased to
call it, divine injustice, which the ancients of the West at-
tributed to the power of the Fates; and we ourselves find,
in the ‘circumstance’ of life, which places one man in some
distant race of savages, to whom the gospel-light has never
penetrated, and who has never received the olessing of
baptism, and another in our own happy island, where every
facility enlightenment can offer is afforded him to work out
his salvation. But while we refer the question to the in-
disputable wisdom of Providence, and seek its solution in
His unlimited mercy, warned as we are by the Parable of
the Talents, which our Master has left us, there woyld seem
to be nothing in the Hindd theory to remove the injustice of
this destiny ; and if we praise the schools of philosophy for
their liberality in allowing to all castes the chance of emanci-
pation, which Brdhmanism refused to some, we cannot but
blame so severe a doctrine, which has nothing to palliate it.

+ This thoory is expounded in ch. xvi. of our pons.


===== PAGE 118 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION, exvil

We have now explained the physiological and speculative
doctrines of our philosopher, contained in the last six chap-
ters of his poem. We have seen that with some modification
he follows the theories of the pure Sinkhya school very
closely. Thus he accepts the system of the twenty-five
categories, admits the eternity, activity, and unintelligence
of nature, and the eternity, inactivity, and intelligence of
the soul; though when he comes to speak of spirit, having
the idea of the Supreme Being before him, he cannot deny
its activity, at least according to our acceptation of the word.
But our poem is a didactic work, our philosopher a teacher
of ethics, and he does not permit himself to indulge at
greater length in the consideration of physiological theories,
and is therefore silent on the subject of the Linga-shartra,
and of the system of intellectual creation brought forward
by Kapila. On the other hand, he enlarges with more free-
dom on the theory of the three qualities, which materially
affect his ethical doctrines, and here proceeds much farther
than his predecessors.

‘We must now turn to the theological portion of our
work, consisting in the second aggregate of six chapters,
and following more particularly the peculiar dogmata of the
Theistic Sankhya. Of these six chapters the last cannot
properly be said to treat of the deity, while the others
mingle with their theology various practical injunctions, and
expositions of the future states of men.

The great point of the Theistic Sankhya in forming a
Being to supply the deficiencies in Kapila’s theories, was his
universality. It was found expedient, when once that deity
was admitted to exist, to attribute and refer everything to
him. The first thing was to unite the material essence or
nature (prakriti), to which Kapila had granted volition in
creation, with a spiritual essence, from which individual
souls emanated. This essence was superior to the material.
To it volition was granted and refused to nature, and the


===== PAGE 119 / 300 =====

exvil BHAGAVAD-GITA.
.

two together formed one Supreme Being, creator, sustainer
and destroyer of the universe. Thus the deity contained the
essences of all that existed, whether spirit or matter. The
individual soul, which emanated from the essence of spirit,
and the developed material objects, which emanated ip like
manner from the essence of matter, could not properly be
considered as identical with the Supreme Being; but were
justly regarded as distinct individuate portions of him,
which, for the period of their individual existence, had a
separate and independent personality. But the author of
the Bhagayad-Gité seems to have gone farther. In order
to conciliate the Vedic school, he constantly mentions indi-
vidual soul as the Supreme Being himself actually existing
in the body of man in the personification only of an in-
dividual soul, and early in the seventh chapter he identifies
nature or the material essence with the Supreme Being; but
at the same time includes under this head of nature, not
only the material essence, but developed matter generally
included under the broad categories of external and in-
ternal matter, the latter being the material machinery for
intelligence, consciousness and ‘sensibility (ch. vii. shls.
411).

Thus the universality of the deity comprehend¢ all things
which exist, whether spirit or matter, either in their essences
or in their individual development. But this deity is also
regarded under two different aspects. We have already said
that, of the three kinds of spirit supposed to exist, two were
identified, and must be looked upon as different aspects only
of the same spirit. These two were the Supreme Being and
the universal spirit or energy, the difference between them
being the personality of the former, and the impersonality
of the latter; and, in other words, they may be called the
Supreme Being*in his independence, and the Supreme Being
in his relation to matter. This latter aspect requires some
explanation. We have already seen that, in order to create


===== PAGE 120 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. exix

a Supreme Being, the Theistic Sénkhya had united the
spiritual and material essences, and to this combination
granted e personality. The Bhagavad-Gité, with the desire
of conciliating the Vedic school, adopted by the side of this
deity, which it admitted, an universal being to which this
personality was refused. Thus, while the Supreme Being
united in himself the essences of spirit and matter, from
which souls and developed matter had respectively emanated
and now left independent, the universal energy in like
manner united these essences, which, however, were still
connected with matter. Thus the material essence in its
independence was nature, the material cause of the uni-
verse :—in its relation to matter it is only vital energy,
the life which revolves throughout all matter. Again, the
spiritual essence in its independence was the spiritual cause
of individual souls, that from which they emanated, and into
which they were again finally absorbed ;—in its relation to
matter, it was the universal spiritual energy supposed to
exist throughout all matter, and in it to represent the deity.!
Thus this universal energy, which is an aspect of the
Supreme Being, consists in the vital energy which gives
life and motion to all matter in greater or less proportion,
and the spiritual energy which seems to be the represen-
tative of the Supreme Being in every material body. This
universal spirit exists in bodies besides the individual soul,
and thus every body contains the Supreme Being himself
independent of its own individual soul, a distinct portion of
that Being. This gives to each body a certain divinity, by

1 In speaking above of the threo kinds of spirit, we were perhaps wrong to use
that term as the translation of the purusha found in chap. xv. of our poem, where
‘we have more correctly rendered it ‘person.’ It designates three kinds of beings,
the Supreme Being, the universal energy, and the individyal soul. From this

jage it may be seen how the two first contain both spirit and ‘matter, at least
in their essences, while the last depends on its connection with matter for its
individuality. We may therefore consider the word purusha, ‘ man or person,’ to
signify ‘spirit combined with matter.”


===== PAGE 121 / 300 =====

xx BHAGAVAD-GITA.

means of which Polytheism, Hero-worship and even animal
worship is defended by the Bhagavad-Gité. For, since
each body contains the Supreme Being, in worshipping
any material body properly and not blindly, we worship the
Supreme Being within it. We a®e then inclined to remark
that, if every material body contains the Supreme Being
under his universal impersonal aspect, each man might as
well worship the Being within himself, and thus become his
own God. To this our philosopher gives no answer ; but,
while introducing this universal deification—which neither
Kapila nor the Theistic Sankhya had dreamed of—for the
sake merely of conciliating the Vedic school, he places the
worship of it on a far inferior footing to that of the Supreme
Being in his personal independence (ch. xii. shls. 2-7). At
the same time, the worship of the universal energy is far
more easy than that of the Supreme Being in his personality,
for the former is manifested in different developed bodies,
and is thus more open to contemplation. This worship,
however, must be distinguished from the mere Brahmanical
worship of the deities, etc., since the latter adores those
things in their own individual material character, while the
former discovers and adores in each of them the Supreme
Being, towards which his worship is really directed (comp.
ch. ix. shl. 23),

The different aspects and characters of the Supreme Being
are, then, thus classed (ch. viii. shls. 3, 4).

1, Adhidaivata, the Supreme Being in his personality, con-
sidered as a deity, and therefore the Supreme Being in
his relation to the gods. This includes the two parts,
the essence of spirit and matter, called

2. Adhydtmd, the essence of spirit, the origin of souls, and
therefore the Supreme Being in his relation to man or
individualesoul, and

3. Adhibhita, the material essence, or the Supreme Being
in his relation to matter.


===== PAGE 122 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION, exxl

4, The One Indivisible (akshara): that is, the universal
energy called indivisible, as contrasted. with individual
souls (kshara).

5. Adhiyajna, the Supreme Being as Vishnu or Krishna, a
manifest object of worship, and therefore the Supreme
Being in his relation to religion.

We have thus seen that the universality of the Supreme
Being was vigorously asserted by the Bhagavad-Gité; and,
in order to do so without annulling his supreme individual
and personal character, its author regards him in two aspects,
really identical, but differing in the personality of the one,
and the want of it in the other. This universality is very
prominent in several passages where the Supreme Being is
declared to be everything that exists, such as ch, x. shl. 39,
where Krishna says, ‘There exists no one thing, moveable
or immoveable (that is, animate or inanimate), which is
without me,’ or ch. xi. shls. 36-40, where Arjuna concludes
his burst of enthusiasm with the exclamation, ‘Thou All!’

The attributes of this Supreme Being are those which we
might expect to find in such a deity. His powers are un-
limited, no less than his existence and extent. He is creator,
preserver, and sustainer; destroyer and reproducer of the
universe; omniscient, omnipresent, minuter than an atom,
and greater than the greatest idea which we can form of
infinity: and he, and he alone, is perfect. These attributes
are brought forward throughout our poem, but particularly
in chs, viii. shl. 9, ix. shls. 9, 18, and xi. shls. 37-39;
while descriptions of his universality are given in chs. vii.
shls. 7-11, x. shls. 20-39, and xi. shls. 9-31; the last pas-
sage being a description of his universal omnipresence in an
imaginary visible form. But though his relations to the
world are*such as we might expect, his relative position to
man is very different from that of our ideasyof a supreme

Compare chap. xv. shls, 7-16.


===== PAGE 123 / 300 =====

oxxii BHAGAVAD-GITA.

deity. In the Supreme Being of Hindi Philosophy, there
is no paternal character, no fatherly affection and interest in
men, his offspring. Certain laws are made for nature, and,
with the superintendence of the deity, these laws keep matter
constantly revolving; and it does not depend on a separate
decree of the Creator, at what exact moment each body dies
and another springs up, but on these laws and destiny—an
arrangement which supersedes divine will, or Providence.
In the same manner the ‘chances and changes of this mortal
life’ are not, as we should suppose them to be, dependent on
a separate act of volition for cach from the sustainer and
preserver. Man is gifted at birth with a certain disposition,
and certain laws regulate the influences of good and evil on
matter, and he is then left to take care of himself, the
worship of the deity not consisting in prayers for his aid, or
for strength to combat evil, but in a species of devotion
which we shall soon have to explain. That affection for all
that he has created, which could mark when even a sparrow
falls to the ground, that omniscience which could number
and preserve every hair upon our heads, is unknown to the
Being adored by the Mindiis, and hence the absence of love
in their worship, and the identification of the Supreme Being
at one period with Shiva, the god of destruction, and the
horrors purposely introduced in the description of his identifi-
cation with Vishnu even, in the cleventh chapter of our poem.

We now come to speak of the practical, the ethical, and
didactic portion of the Bhagavad-Gita, generally contained
in the first six chapters and in chapters xii. and xviii. For
his original idcas, the philosopher is undoubtedly ,consider-
ably indebted to Patanjali, and traces may be found in his
work of the rules of his predecessor’s system; but the cha-
racter now given to them is so new, and the whole theory is
so changed, and, in some respects, even contrary to that
school, that we may at once call the practical doctrines of
the Bhagavad-Gité the exclusive property of its author.


===== PAGE 124 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. cxxil

In order, however, to comprehend their tendency, we must
recal to mind the causes which obliged the establishment of
this new school of Yoga. The system of Patanjali had, as
we have seen, been found far too seductive to so contempla-
tive and splenetic a race as the Hindi, who preferred its
hard injunctions, since they insured emancipation, to the
vicissitudes of a hated existence, which was certain to be
resumed hereafter with nothing but « change, perhaps for
the worse, of body. It was found that it destroyed the in-
stitution of caste by alluring all classes alike from their
prescribed duties to follow an ascetic life, hitherto open only
to Brahmans; and, since on the institution of caste hung the
vitality of Bréhmanism, it was necessary to counteract this
evil influence. The author of the Bhagavad-Gité, whoever
he may have been, was a Brahman, a philosopher, and more
—a man of much more common sense than usually fell to
the lot of either one or other of these characters, He
stepped forward and accepted the charge. The plan of
violent opposition had long since been abandoned as useless,
and even dangerous by the priesthood; that of conciliation
was now preferred. Two principal points were to be estab-
lished,’ the necessity of preserving the institution of caste,
and the application of the very doctrines which were to be
opposed to every-day life, and the consequent reconciliation
of Yoga and Brahmanism. At the same time our author
was himself a follower of Patanjali, and while he upholds the
institution of caste, and secks to recal men from asceticism to
the world, he does not deny the efficacy and excellence of
asceticism as taught by Patanjali; but prudently asserts
that his own application of it to every-day life is still more
excellent, yet more efficacious.

The arguments as to the institution of caste are negative
rather than positive, and are skilfully brought in by our
poet. They are mainly directed against the Kshatriyas; and
Arjuna, a prince of that caste, is represented with one of


===== PAGE 125 / 300 =====

CXx1V BHAGAVAD-GITA.

those rare characters which unite the courage of the one
with the tender compassion of the other sex. At the very
moment when he is called upon to draw his bow upon his
enemies, when the battle is already commencing, he is struck
powerless by the horrible idea of the slaughter about to take
place, and refuses to fight. His arguments are favoured by
the circumstance that the enemies who opposed him were all
more or less related to him by blood, and that war therefore
became literal fratricide, and could not be undertaken without
crime. To these and many other specious arguments, the
only reply is the stern necessity of the duty of one’s caste.
The duty of the warrior-caste was to combat the foes of one’s
country, and if this were abandoned even from the best
feelings of human nature, the whole organization of the
State would be undermined. The reproach of effeminate
weakness is then added, and, on the other hand, glory is
depicted in glowing colours. From this it would seem that
the civilization of the period at which our author wrote had
gone far to mollify the natural savage and warlike character
of the Kshatriya, while enlightenment and art had induced
a general feeling of sympathy for others’ sufferings, which
little accorded with the Brahmanical views of the nature
of a warrior’s duty. In this respect the arguments of our
philosopher are often contradictory. Te constantly urges
throughout our poem the excellence of charity, brotherly
love, and consideration for others; but, while admitting and
approving these, he asserts that the duties of caste rise above
all such considerations, and his arguments are so nicely in-
troduced that the contradiction is not striking. The necessity
of performing the duties of one’s caste is then the didactic
burden of the whole poem, At the end of nearly every
chapter Arjuna is exhorted to arise and fight, and the great
dogma seems tq be that, however bad or obnoxious one’s own
duty may be, it is better than that of another (ch. iii. 35,
xviii. 47),


===== PAGE 126 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. cXXxV

In attempting to adapt the doctrines of Patanjali’s school
—so directly opposed to them, and inculcating a monastic
retirement from this Jife’s duties—to those which have just
been explained, our author divides the general system of
Yoga, of which he is a follower, into two classes,—Patanjali’s
and his own. The former he calls Jndnayoga, or devotional
worship of the deity by means of spiritual knowledge (yndna) ;
and the latter Karmayoga, or the like worship by means of
the actions (karma) of every-day life. He describes the
tendency and the rules pertaining to each. -

Patanjali, as has been seen, acknowledged, in company
with the Theistic SAnkhya and Kapila, that spiritual know-
ledge of the truth was the means of acquiring final emanci-
pation ; but he reduced the acquirement of this knowledge
to a certain system, and made its employment the worship of
a definite object. The chief instrument in its acquirement
was contemplation or internal investigation, and since the
practice of this required a renuntiation of the world and the
common actions of this life, renuntiation of actions (sannydsa)
was his principal dogma. The rules for this renuntiation
and the acquirement of knowledge, which it preceded, are
given by our poet as follows (ch, vi. shls. 10-32).

The manswho devotes himself to such a life, in the hope of
working out his emancipation from the flesh, must begin by
renouncing all his connection with the world. Abandoning
his home, his friends, his possessions, and everything that is
dear to him, he must retire into the jungle. Here ho
should choose a spot which is unpolluted in the eyes of the
Brébmans. It must be situated neither too high nor too
low, and ho must here make a couch of Kusha grass (Poa
cynosuroides), on which to sit or lie. A woollen or cotton
sheet, atid the skin of some animal, should serve him for a
covering. On this couch he should sit in.contemplation,
Tlis posture should be easy, but erect, and as steady and
motionless as possible; in order that his thoughts may not


===== PAGE 127 / 300 =====

exxvl BHAGAVAD-GITA.

be disturbed by the movements of his body, nor sleep be in-
duced by recumbence. His eyes should be fixed on the end
of his nose, and he should never move his gaze, lest the
worldly objects around should distract his attention; while,
if he shut his eyes, he would be more liable to slumber.
Lastly, his mind should be intently fixed on the one object
of contemplation, the Supreme Being. This exercise should
be repeated during increasing lengths of time, until the
Yogin, or devotee, becomes capable of sustaining it with per-
fection for any period. Meanwhile he must preserve a just
medium in his mode of life. He must be moderate in eating,
sleeping, and recreation, but should not starve completely,
nor entirely refrain from sleep; but, as he advances, he
will find it more easy to dispense with both rest and food.
His heart also should be cleared of all worldly aversions or
desires, and should preserve an equanimity which will render
him indifferent to all external influences, whether pleasant or
unpleasant, good or bad; and make him feel alike towards
all things and beings. In this state the light of the truth is
gradually kindled within him, and he experiences a feeling
of internal satisfaction and pleasure superior to any sensual
enjoyment. This state is internal devotion, through know-
ledge, to the Supreme Being, and a steady contistuance in it
concludes with final emancipation. Its chief requirement is
the renuntiation of the actions of every-day life, and absti-
nence even from every kind of action. Action, according to
this school, was always followed with consequences more or
less disagreeable; action was always imperfect, and, therefore,
in the way of perfection ; action distracted the thoughts, ‘and
was therefore opposed to contemplation. Lastly, action was
incited by the three qualities, which it was the object of the
devotee to combat and subdue, and for these reasons action
was to be avoided.

In replying to these arguments, our author admits the
excellence of sannydea, or renuntiation, but explains it in a


===== PAGE 128 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. xxv

very different manner. Action, he says, is only attended
with consequences when the agent has any interest or motive
whatsoever in what he does. Performed simply as a duty,
or as a necessity in supporting life, it is attended with no
consequences which can affect the soul or hinder its emanci-
pation. It is true that action is incited by the three qualities,
but the devotee should rather attack those qualities them-
selves in their influence on his heart, by walling his heart
and senses against them, than seek to annul their power by
restraining their results. Again, he admits the power of
perfection in knowledge to obtain emancipation, but he
would substitute for it a state of mind and heart so devoted
to the Supreme Being that all actions of this life will be
performed as so many sacrifices to that Being, he being their
motive and always present in the mind of their agent. The
Earmayoga, therefore, which he would teach, requires no
actual retirement from the world, but, on the contrary, the
full performance of that earthly calling to which we may
chance to be born. He asserts that the two schools virtually
teach the same dogma, viz. Renuntiation, This, however,
is understood by Patanjali as the actual physical retirement
from ‘the world, and abandonment of worldly actions and
duties ; while our author would explain it as the moral re-
tirement from the influences of this world and the abandon-
ment of all worldly interests and anxieties. Actions must
still be performed, but they are just as much renounced if
performed as a duty and a sacrifice, without any self-interest
or worldly motive, as they would be if altogether rejected.
Agfin, this view of renuntiation is supported by the fallacy
of the other, since the actual physical abstinence from action
cannot be fully carried out in this life. However much we
may abstain from the performance of actions, the corporeal
routine action of life musi still continue. The limbs must
still be moved, the heart still beat and the blood circulate ;
we must still eat and drink, and however simple this food


===== PAGE 129 / 300 =====

exxvil BHAGAVAD-GITA.

may be—be it the mere leaves off the ground, which formed
the dainties of some austere anchorets—we must still employ
action to obtain it. Thus, as long as life continues, action,
however slight, continues also, and the total abstinence from
it is, therefore, an impossibility. Nor is the mere abstinence
from action real renuntiation. If a man could even acquire
complete inaction, he would not be a true renouncer if he
did not also restrain the desires of his heart, and all worldly
thoughts. The mere restraint of the senses is worth nothing,
unless accompanied by a corresponding restraint of the heart;
and if the latter be fully accomplished, the action of the
senses will do but little harm, if any, since it will have no
influence on the heart, and cannot therefore reach the soul
(ch. v. shls. 4-9).

The doctrines of the two schools may, therefore, be thus
epitomised. The Jndnayoga, or school of Patanjali, enjoins
the avoidance of temptation, The Karmayoga, or school of
the Bhagavad-Git4, enjoins the combating of temptation.
Both teach that the world is evil, and that its influence,
which tends to obstruct devotion, must be destroyed. The
one says, ‘Avoid the world;’ the other more courageously bids
us meet it with a well-armed faith and a well-fortified heart.
The difference between them is the same as that between the
monk and the priest of modern days, and our author has
justly appreciated the superiority of the latter.

The method of combating the influence of the world, put for-
ward by the Bhagavad-Gité, in place of asceticism, is simple,
if not easy. It consists in destroying all attachment to it.
When this is done, our actions are no longer prompted by
interested motives, but performed as a duty or a sacrifice,
with the Supreme Being ever before our eyes. But this at-
tachment to the world can only be conquered by subjection
of the heart, which is, of course, its seat. The affections of
the heart are, however, received from without. The heart
naturally dislikes that which does not please it, and affects


===== PAGE 130 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. Cxx1x:

that which does please it; but the perception of such ex-
ternal objects as please or displease is acquired through the
medium of the senses, which connect the internal man with
external matter. Patanjali, therefore, would annul their
influence on the heart by removing them from the objects
which are likely to please or displease it most. Our author,
on the other hand, would allow their influence to continue,
but would subject the heart so completely, as to make it of
no effect. This subjection is accomplished by devotion. Man
must be resolute and firm. He must keep the one object of
final emancipation ever before him, and while he restrains
his thoughts from all worldly and external objects, medi-
tating only on the Supreme Being, he must, by the power of
the soul over the body, and by the strength of his own
will, prevent his heart from experiencing either affection
or aversion towards the objects of which it receives impres-
sions through the senses. Passion of every kind is the gate
of destruction, and must, therefore, be subdued. One object
of desire alone is allowed to the heart, and this is final
emancipation. One thing alone must be loved; one thing
alone attentively thought upon, and this is the Supreme
Being: Complete equanimity, complete indifference to pain
or pleasurey love or hate, to all worldly matters, must be
acquired before this devotion to the Supreme One can be
steadily fixed in the heart. In every action of life, that
Being alone must be uppermost in our thoughts. We must
remember that the action performed is not done for our own
sakes, with any interested motive, but as an offering of love
and duty to the Supreme Being, in purity and equality of
heart.

In this, at least, there is no fanaticism, as there may be
in the aSceticism taught by Patanjali. This is, at least, a
sensible and religious doctrine; and if we adq to it faith and
love, will be even a Christian doctrine. And would that in
the present selfish age, and this northern active clime, it


===== PAGE 131 / 300 =====

Xxx BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

could be applied and successfully carried out by Christians,
as we call ourselves! It is the teaching of our Saviour
when he bids us hate father and mother, and take up the
cross, and when he points to the lily of the field, which toils
and spins not, but puts faith in its Creator to give it nourish-
ment. We, too, should havg our final emancipation, our
salvation ever as our only desire, and our Supreme Being—
so far superior, so far more loveable than the imperfect deity
of the Hindu philosopher—ever as our chief object of love.
We, too, should do our duty in this world without self-
interest and attachment, and morally renounce the world in
the rejection of all interest in it. The great outcry against
this doctrine is, that it is unnatural. Nature bids us take an
interest in the world. Naturo fills us with emulation and
ambition. It is natural to love advancement, prosperity,
increase of wealth. It is natural to depend on ourselves
alone, and not to put much faith in the promises of God,
who will not help us, if we do not help ourselves. All this,
it is true, is natural. But it is natural to sin, and vory un-
natural to act uprightly; and the want of nature is no
ground for accusation of our doctrines.

But we must not be carried away by enthusiasm at the
apparent Christianity of the doctrines of our philosopher.
We must not forget how much of the genuine Brahman lies
beneath this upper coating, nor arrogate for him more than
the praise due to a clever reformer and a wise ethical philo-
sopher. Had our author had more courage, had his policy
been less conciliatory, had he sought to establish the theories
of which he dreamed, independent of the rank systems to
which he conceded so much, the results of his teaching might
have been different. We say might, for as well strive to
wash the Ethiopian white, as to convert the native of the
north and centre of India from the belief which the climate,
aided by the continual teaching of master minds through
long ages, has planted deeply in his bosom. The Bhagavad-


===== PAGE 132 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. CXXX1

Gité obtained an exalted reputation in India, but its doc-
trines, like those of the Vedas, were applied as its students
listed. The resignation, the indifference, the inertness, and
the fatalism of the Hindi still remained, as it will remain
for ages, and the banks of the Ganges will never be crowded
by a Christian population till the doctrines taught be enslaved
to the character of the audience.

One thing may, however, be said for the strange nation
among whom these doctrines are still disseminated. In no
country, under no climate in the world, has religious feeling,
in whatever shape, been so firm and constant in the hearts of
all classes as in India. No nation, no people under the sun,
has had the future after death so constantly before their
minds, has been so little wedded to this life, and so intent on
their emancipation from it. This would seem to be a fine
groundwork for the eternal teaching of the Sacred Book;
but the climate which has effected this, has also nourished
and sustained the mysticism and the fatalism of Bréhmanism
and its Darshanas; and the sward that looks so green and
tempting to the eye, covers a morass, in which the pure
doctrines of tho Gospel would sink to be swamped.


===== PAGE 133 / 300 =====

REMARKS ON THE BHAGAVAD-GITA.

Tue great drawback in speaking of Hindi literature, is the
complete absence of any chronological data. The nations
which chronicle their own existence, and hand to posterity
the history of their glories, are those over which some vain-
glorious dynasty has ruled, who delighted to display their
splendour to the eyes of the future as well as to those of the
present, India has been always more or less governed by a
hierarchy, and it was not till the minor states gradually
melted together into a northern empire, in the first centuries
of our own era, that any history was composed, or any dates
given. The epics of the earlier ages were only partially
chronicles. We know that Sutas, or bards, were attached
to each tribe or principal family, and that their hereditary
office was to preserve and recite to their masters the glories
of their ancestors, But the very fact of their being also
charioteers would seem to indicate that these recitals were
originally made at the moment of battle, in order to inspire
courage in the followers of the chieftains, and certainly no
-archives, but vague tradition thus handed from father to son,
were ever preserved.

When the power of the priesthood was somewhat broken
by the prevalence of Buddhism, the kingly caste gained
strength and vitality. Literature flourished, and scholars
and archeologists sprang up, who preferred to examine the
work of their predecessors to risking any novelties of their
own. Hence arose the first enquiry into the past, and dates
were given to every work that had been hitherto composed.
But since the language of these was no longer the vernacular,


===== PAGE 134 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION: exxxm1

since nothing could be really known of the true dates, and
since their authority was respected, and the superiority of
their contents acknowledged, the dates given by the natives
to most works were purely fictitious, and as remote as pos-
sible. Among others which received this distinction was the
Bhagavad-Gita, whose conciligtory doctrines, receivable by
all classes of belief, met on all sides with a welcome. No
actual numerical date was stated for it, but it was unhesi-
tatingly attributed to the same personage who is said to have
compiled the Vedas, and composed most of the Purénas.
The slight knowledge of Indian history, which has been
gathered from Indian literature, and the strong internal
evidence of the language, enable us to interpose at least
some nine or ten centuries between the sacred text-books
and our poem, and some five or six, at least, between our
poem and the Purdnas. This would give to the Vy4sa the
unwonted longevity of fifteen centuries, which not even
Br4hmanical scholiasts care to allow him.

In the ‘Index’ it may be seen that the Vy4sa, Krishna
Dwaip4yana, to whom the Vedas are attributed, is rather a
mythological than an historical personage; and, if, by the
side of this it be remembered that the modesty of the real
author at an age when truth would be sacrificed to effect,
might prompt him to attribute the composition of his own
work to so celebrated a writer, we shall not be surprised to
find that Sanjaya (ch, xviii. shl, 75) refers his knowledge of
what he relates to the favour of the Vydsa. This, however,
is no admission that the work was his composition; and
when we finally call to mind that it was intended by its
author t8 be considered as an episode in the Mahabharata,
which was also attributed to the same compiler, we shall
understand his silence as to his own name, and resign our-
selves to consider the authorship of the finest specimen of
Hindi literature as lost in oblivion for ever.

Not so however its date. We have already shown to what


===== PAGE 135 / 300 =====

exxxiv BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

period its doctrines should refer it; we have already approxi-
mated its date between one century before and three after
Christ, and by this we feel inclined to abide. The character
of the Bhagavad-Gité as a literary composition, obliges us to
place it at the prime age of Sanskrit literature. This age
seems to have been that of the drama. Kalidésa and our
author must have been bred in the same school of civiliza-
tion, and nurtured in the same lap of national taste. It is
quite possible that our poet may have moved among those
great minds, those philosophers and men of science, those
poets, dramatists, and wits, who thronged, as we know,
round the throne of Vikraméditya,' as bright planets round
a brighter sun.

There is no doubt that our author, whatever his name, age,
or birthplace, was more of a philosopher than a poct; still
his work contains much that deserves the title of poetry,
even according to our more delicate ideas. Though it is
in form rather a dialogue than a narration, the author has
succeeded in giving some portraiture of character in the
personages he introduces. We may instance the delicacy,
generosity, and almost womanly tenderness of Arjuna (c.g.
in ch. i. shl. 23), the ambition and odium in Duryodhana,
the ferocity of Bhima, and the mysterious confidence of
Krishna. Nor is the bosom friendship of the two principal
speakers ill described, still less the delicate fears of Arjuna
lest he should have offended his friend by his former famili-
arity, when he discovers in him the One Almighty Being
(ch. xi. shls. 41, 42).

The Bhagavad-Gité has been called an episode of the
Mah4bhérata, and some of the MSS. insert it in its proper
place in that poem. It must not, however, be imagined for
a moment that it has any further connection with {t. The

1 ‘This emperor is supposed to have flourished about 66 w.c., and nine men of
genius and learning, including KGlidasa, the poet, and Amarasinha, the lexico-
graph, are called the pearls that adorned his court at Ujjayini, the modern Oujein.


===== PAGE 136 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. CXxxV

Mahébhérata, as all students of Sanskrit well know, is the
great epic of India, which, from its popularity and extent,
would seem to correspond with the Iliad among the Greeks.
The theme of the whole work is a certain war which was
carried on between two branches of one tribe, the descend-
ants of Kuru, for the sovereignty of Hastin4pura, commonly
supposed to be the same as the modern Delhi. The elder
branch is called by the general name of the whole tribe,
Kurus; the younger goes by the patronymic from Pandu,
the father of its five principal leaders.

This war between the Kurus and PAndavas occupies about
twenty thousand shlokas, or a quarter of the whole work, as
we now possess it. The rest is filled with episodes and
legends, chiefly didactic, of a much later date, inserted, from
time to time, by authors who wished to give the authority of
antiquity to their teaching. The whole forms a collection
of the traditions of the early history of the Aryan people
during their first settlement in India. The plan of inserting
didactic and other works into the old and well-known epics
of carlier ages was very common when civilization and
literature had progressed to such a point that a Jesuitical
fiction'was a matter of small account. Thus the story of Nala
is consideretl as an episode of the Mahabharata, that of Vish-
w&mitra and the Raghu-Vansha of the Ram4yana, and these,
and many others, are all of later date, perhaps, by some
centuries, than the original works. Some ingenuity is,
however, always employed by the authors of these episodes
in adapting them to the peculiar passage of .the greater
works to which they are to be tacked on, and accordingly
we find the first chapter of our poem occupied exclusively
with narrative, which savours very strongly of the epic. In
order to ‘understand the allusions there made, a knowledge is
requisite of the preceding history of the tribe, which will
now be given as follows.

Of the name Kuru we know but little, but that little is


===== PAGE 137 / 300 =====

“CXXavl BHAGAVAD-GITA.

sufficient to prove that it is one of great importance. We
have no means of deriving it from any Sanskrit root, nor has
it, like too many of the old Indian names, the appearance of
being explanatory of the peculiarities of the person or persons
whom it designates. It is, therefore, in all probability, a
name of considerable antiquity, brought by the Aryan race
from their first seat in Central Asia. .Its use in Sanskrit is
fourfold. It is the name of the northern quarter, or Dwipa,
of the world, and is described as lying between the most
northern range of snowy mountains and the polar sea. It is,
further, the name of the most northern of the nine Varshas
of the known world. Among the long genealogies of the
tribe itself, it is found as the name of an ancient king, to
whom the foundation of the tribe is attributed. Lastly, it
designates an Aryan tribe of sufficient importance to disturb
the whole of northern India with its factions, and to make
its battles the theme of the longest epic of olden time.

Viewing these facts together, we should be inclined to
draw the conclusion that the name was originally that of a
race inhabiting Central Asia, beyond the Himélaya, who emi-
grated with other races into the north-west of the Peninsula,
and with them formed the great people who styled themselves
unitedly A’rya, or the Noble, to distinguish them from the
aborigines whom they subducd, and on whose territories they
eventuully settled. These Aryans are the people who brought
Bréhmanism and the Sanskrit tongue into India, and whom
etymologists and antiquaries know to be of the same blood
and origin as the races which people the whole of Persia,
and almost all the continent of Europe, in short, the Indo-
Germanic or Indo-Scythic class.

At the time when the plot of the Mahébhérata .was
enacted, this tribe was situated in the plain of the Doab,
and their particular region, lying between the Jumna and
Sursooty rivers, was called Kurukshetra, or the plain of the
Kurus, The capital of this country was Hastinépura, and


===== PAGE 138 / 300 =====

INTRODUCTION. CxXxxvil

here reigned, at a period of which we cannot give the exact
date, a king named Vichitravirya. He was the son of
Shantanu and Satyavati; and Bhishma and Krishna Dwai-
payana, the Vyasa, were his half-brothers; the former being
his father’s, the latter his mother’s son. He married two
sisters, Ambé and Ambaliké, but dying shortly after his
marriage from excessive connubial rites, he left no progeny ;
and his half-brother, the Vy4sa, instigated by divine com-
mand, married his widows, and begot two sons, Dhritar4shtra
and Péndu. The former had one hundred sons, the eldest of
whom was Duryodhana. The latter married firstly Prith4,
or Kunti, the daughter of Shura, and secondly Madri. The
children of these wives were the five Pandava princes; but
as their mortal father had been cursed by a deer while
hunting to be childless all his life, these children were
mystically begotten by different deities. Thus Yudhishthira,
Bhima, and Arjuna, were the sons of Prith4, by Dharma,
Vayu, and Indra, respectively. Nakula was the son of
Médri, by Nasatya the elder, and Sahadeva, by Dasra the
younger, of the twin Ashwinau, the physicians of the gods.
This story would seem to be a fiction, invented to give a
divine origin to the five heroes of the poem: but, however
this may be,’ Duryodhana and his brothers are the leaders of
the Kuru, or elder branch of the tribe ; and the five Pandava
princes those of the Pandava, or younger branch.
Dhritarashtra was blind, but although thus incapacitated
for governing, he retained the throne, while his son Duryo-
dhana really directed the affairs of the State. The latter
seems to have been the type of an ambitious and contentious
intriguer, and among other things, he prevailed on his father
to banish his cousins, the Pandava princes, from the country.
After long wanderings and varied hardships, these princes col-
lected their friends around thom, formed by the help of many
neighbouring kings a vast army, and prepared to attack their
unjust oppressor, who had, in like manner, assembled his forces,
The hostile armies meet on the plain of theeKurus,


===== PAGE 139 / 300 =====

oxxxviii BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

Bhighma, the half-brother of Vichitravirya, being the oldest
warrior among them, has the command of the Kuru faction;
Bhima, the second son of Péndu, noted for his strength and
prowess, is the general of the other party. The scene of our
poem now opens, and remains throughout the same,—the
field of battle. In order to introduce to the reader the names
of the principal chieftains in each army, Duryodhana is made
to approach Drona, his military preceptor, and name them
one by one. The challenge is then suddenly given by
Bhishma, the Kuru gencral, by blowing his conch; and he is
seconded by all his followers. It is returned by Arjuna, who
is in the same chariot with the god Krishna, who, in com-
passion for the persecution he suffered, had become his in-
timate friend, and was now acting the part of a charioteer to
him. He is followed by all the generals of the Pandavas.
The fight then begins with a volley of arrows from both
sides; but when Arjuna perceives it, he begs Krishna to draw
up the chariot in the space between the two armies, while he
examines the lines of the enemy. The god does so, and points
out in those lines the numerous relatives of his friend. Arjuna
is horror-struck at the idea of committing fratricide by slay-
ing his near relations, and throws down his bow and arrow,
declaring that he would rather be killed without defend-
ing himself, than fight against them. Krishna replies with
the arguments which form the didactic and philosophical
doctrines of the work, and endeavours to persuade him that
he is mistaken in forming such a resolution. Arjuna is
eventually over-ruled. The fight goes on, and the Péndavas
defeat their opponents with most complete victory. .

Such is the plot by which the ideas and doctrines of one
age are woven in with those of a far earlier one, and we
cannot deny at least the ingenuity and perhaps too the
elegance with which the undertaking is carried out.

This brief explanation will suffice to make the reader at

_ home in the study of the poem, and we therefore leave him
at once ¢o its perusal.


===== PAGE 140 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE FIRST.
OM!!

DHRITARASHTRA SPOKE.
What did my followers and those of Péndu do, when as-
sembled for the purpose of fighting on the sacred plain,? the
plain of Kuru,? Sanjaya?

1 This was the mystic monosyllable with which all the hymns of the Vedas, and
afterwards all works which treated of theology, were commenced. It is composed
of the three letters a, % and wn; the @ and w combining to form the diphthong 0.
The Tindés lok upon itas a Yoel representation of the Supreme Being, in his
simple character of Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of the universe. Thus, the
a is said to represent Vishnu, the preserver; the v, Shiva, the destroyer; and the
m, Brahma, the creator. A’ more probable origin is, that it is composed of the
initials of the three personifications of the triad of elements, which is a much
more ancient trinity than that of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. The « would then
represent ‘Agni, or fire; the « Varuna, water; and the m Marut, wind or air, The
reverence attached to this monosylluble may be inferred from the fuct that some

«transcribers of MSS. have been afraid to write the awful word itself, and have
substituted some other. See Wilson's ‘Vishnu Purana,’ p. 273, note 4,

2 The name of a flat region situate in the Doab, the strip of land between the
Indus, the Ganges, and the Himilaya range. It lies between the rivers Yamuna
(Gamay and Sarasvati (Sursooty), and comprises, according to Manu (ii. 19), the

istrict’ of Kurukshetra, of the Matsyas, tho Panchélas, and tho Shiraseuakas.
It is there called the country of the Brahmarshis, The Sarasvatt (Sursooty) is an
insignificant stream flowing through Sirhind, between the Yamung and the
Shatadru. It eventually loses itself in the sand of the desert, and is, on that
account, fabled by the Hinds to flow underground into the ocean. It is held,
however, as one of the most sacred streams of India. Lassen (Indische Alters
thumskunde,®vol. i, p. 123) calls the Doab the Belgium of India. It is the
gateway of the peninsula, where the castern and western races have always met
in battle, Here, in lator days, was fought the battle of Paniput; and here was
laid the scene of that war which transferred the sovereignty of middle India from
the Kurus f> the Pandavas. As it was the gate of India, so does it in all
probability derive its sacred name from being the first seat of the Aryan
whenee it worked its way from the Indus to the Ganges, and grom being retained
in their memory with all the respect due to a fatherland.

2 A part of Dharmakshetr, the lat plain around Delhi, which city in often
identified with Hastinépura, the capital of Kurukshetra, and the seat of the
government of Dhritarashtra, and of his son Duryodhana,



===== PAGE 141 / 300 =====

2 BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE FIRST.

SANJAYA SPOKE.

When king Duryodhana beheld the army of the Pandavas
drawn up in order,‘ he thon approached his preceptor,> and
spoke these words. ‘Behold, O preceptor! this huge army of
the sons of Pandu, drawn up by thy clever pupil, the son of
Drupada.§ In it are warriors with huge bows, equal to Bhima
and Arjuna in battle, (namely) Yuyudhéna and Viréta, and
Drupada on his great car; Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, and the
valiant king of Kashi;7 Purujit and Kuntibhoja and Shaivya,
chief of men; and Yudhdmanyu the strong, and Uttamaujas
the brave, the son of Subhadr4,* and all the sons of Draupadi,®
too, in their huge chariots. But remark those, who are the
most distinguished amongst us, the leaders of my army, O
best of Brahmans!!° I will name them to thee, that thou
mayst know them,

‘There are thyself, and Bhishma, and Karna, and Kripa,
victorious in battle, Ashwatthaman, and Vikarna, and Sau-
madatti too, and many other heroes, who risk their lives for
my sake, armed with divers weapons, all experienced in war.
This army of mine, which is commanded by Bhishma," is not

« Be careful to derive ryidha from vi dh, not from ri + rah.
5 Drona, who was the military instructor of many warriors ‘of both parties,
though himself by birth a Brihman. Note that «ehdrya is used for a preceptor
in general, whcther in rcligious or profane sciences; gurw for one in the
former only.
© Dhrishtadyumna, the elder son of Drupada,
1 Késhi or Vardinast is the modern Benares.
® Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna and Subbadr, the sister of Krishna, from
whom he is algo called Saubhadra.
® Draupadi, otherwise called Krishn& or Panchili, was daughter of Drupada,
and wife of each of the five sons of Panda, Her son by Yudhighthira, was
Prativindhya, by Bhima S(tasoma or Shrutasoma, by Arjuna Shrutakirti, by
Nakula Shaténtka, and by Sahadeva Shrutasena.
1© Lit., Twice-born,’ which was a title given especially to Brahmans, and
generally to Kshatriyas and Vaishyas, all’ of whom were considered to
spiritually born again when invested at the age of maturity with the sacrificial
thread. By this ceremony the Aryan race was distinguished from the aborigines.
1 Bhevdn is a word of respec, often used forthe ssond person, and equivalent
to ‘your honoar,’ ‘ your worship,’ ete.
19 Bhishma, the great step-uncle of Duryodhana and his cousins, received the
command of the former's army, from being the oldest of all the warriors, and the
«Most renowned, :



===== PAGE 142 / 300 =====

THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA. 3

sufficient; but that army of theirs, commanded by Bhima, is
sufficient.’ And do you, even all of you, drawn up in all the
ranks of the army, according to your grades, attend even to
Bhishma.’

Then, in order to encourage him,’ the ardent old ancestor
of the Kurus" blew his trumpet,’ sounding loud as the roar
of a lion. Then, on a sudden, trumpets, kettle-drums,
cymbals, drums, and horns were sounded. That noise grew
toan uproar, And standing on a huge car drawn by white
horses, the slayer of Madhu’ and the son of Pandu" blew
their celestial trumpets. Krishna'’ (blew his horn called)

13 Duryodhana, who had just complained that his army was insufficient to cope
with the enemy.

4 Bhighma.

8 Lit, ‘Conch-shell,’ which was used as a war-trumpet, and received a ‘nom~
de-guerre’ from its owner.

18 Kyighpa.—See Zndez, under ‘Madhu.’

1 Arjuna, Krishna and Arjuna were in the same chariot, the former acting
for the time as Arjuna’s site or chariotecr.

18 In shloka 24, this name recurs coupled with a similar one, Gudékesha,
applied to Arjuna. A twofold method of translating them is open to each; and as
the difficulty in deciding which to choose throughout our pocm is great, I have
preferred to leave them alone. The grammarians derive Hrishikesha from
hrighika, ‘a sense,’ and ‘sha, ‘lord,’ —‘the lord of the senses,’ a name applicable to
Krishna, when looked on in a philosophical point of view, as identical with
the Supreme Spirit. Guddkesha they derive from gudika, ‘sleep,’ and sha,
“Jord,’—‘the lord of sleep” ‘The objection to both is that the words Arighika and
guddia occur nowhere but in the grammarians’ writings, and are justly suspected
of being coined by them, Again, however appropriate the first epithet may be to
Krishna, we know no good reason why the second should be applied to Arjuna,
Schlegel has sought another derivation. Ie considers the second part of each
word to be Aesha, ‘hair:’ and hrishi to be an clongated form derived from risk,
“to be rough,’ while gudd means the Euphorbia plant. He would therefore
render the first word ‘with upraised or turned-up hair,’ the second ‘with hair
twisted, or matted like the leaves of the Euphorbia;’ and he considers the frst

ithet duly supported by that of kerkare, ‘hairy,’ so constantly applied to
Hrishna. ho cificulty lice inthe want of authority for the fifst, and the
strained nature of the second, derivation, Burnouf, whose opinion must always
have great weight, says, in the preface to his translation of the ‘Bhégavata
Purina,’ vol. i. p. 168, that as the derivations given by the grammarians and by
the translaters are cqually unsatisfactory, we should make the best of theri, while
waiting for better; and he proposes that the meaning attributed to these words by
the grammarians should bo retained in works of a metaphysical or philosophical
nature, such as the Purinas; that of the translators, in Werks of an epio and
historical character. Since the ‘Bhagavad-Gité’ may side with the former in ita
contents, and with the latter in its form as an episodo of the ‘Mah&bhérata,’ we
prefer to leave these epithets untranslated,



===== PAGE 143 / 300 =====

4 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIRST.

Pénchajanya;! the Despiser of Wealth" blew ‘the Gift of
the Gods’; he of dreadful deeds and wolfish entrails” blew a
great trumpet called Paundra;*! king Yudhishthira, the son
of Kunti, blew ‘the Eternal Victory’; Nakula and Sahadeva
blew ‘the Sweet-toned’ and the ‘ Blooming-with-jewels.’ The
king of K4shi, renowned for the excellence of his bow, and
Shikandin in his huge chariot, Dhrishtadyumna, and Virdta
and Sétyaki, unconquered by his foes; and Drupada and the
sons of Draupadi, altogether, O king of earth! and the
strong-armed son of Subhadré, each severally blew their
trumpets. That noise lacerated the hearts of the sons of
Dhritar4shtra, an uproar resounding both through heaven
and earth. Now when Arjuna”! beheld the Dh4rtardshtras
drawn up, and that the flying of arrows had commenced, he
raised his bow, and then addressed these words, O king of
earth! to Krishna.

‘Draw up my chariot, O Eternal One! between the two
armies, that I may examine these men drawn up and
anxious for battle, (and see) with whom I have to fight in
the strife of war. I perceive that those who are assembled
here are about to fight, from a wish by so doing to do a
favour to the evil-minded son of Dhritardshtra.’”

SANJAYA SPOKE,

Krishna ® being thus addressed by Arjuna,* O Bharata!
drew up that best of chariots between the two armies; and

1” Made of the bones of the giant Panchajana.—Seo Indes.

% Bhima, The first epithet is a play on his name, which means ‘dreadful’; the
second denotes his ferocious and implacable disposition.

2 Lit., (He whose standard is an ape.’ It seems to have beon the custom to
carry some device as a war-ensign on the chariot.

% Lit., The sons of Dhritarshtra, Duryodhana and his brothers; But hero put
generally’ for themselves and their followers, the whole Kuru party.

% Duryodhana, “By this Arjuna, whose character is drawn throughout as one
of almost’ feminine delicacy of feeling and noble generosity, wishes to exculpate
the rest of the Kurus from the charge of cruelty towards their relations, and
to throw all the blame on the odious Duryodhana,


===== PAGE 144 / 300 =====

THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA, 0

before Bhishma and Drona and all the kings of the earth,
he said:

‘Behold, O king! these Kurus here assembled.’ Standing
there, the king beheld fathers and grandfathers, preceptors
and maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, and friends,
fathers-in-law and acquaintances," in both of the armies.
Gazing on all these relations drawn up (in battle array), the
son of Kunti,® moved by extreme compassion, spoke with
sadness, as follows: .

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘Now that I have beheld this kindred standing here near
together for the purpose of fighting, my limbs give way, and
my face is dried up* (of the blood in my veins), and tremor
is produced throughout my body, and my hair stands on end.
My bow, Gandiva,” slips from my hand, and my skin, too,
burns (with fever), Nor am I able to remain upright, and
my mind is, as it were, whirling round. And I perceive
adverse omens,* O hairy one! Nor do I foresee anything
better, even when I shall have slain theso relations in battle.
I seek not victory, Krishna, nor a kingdom, nor pleasures.
What should we do with a kingdom, Govinda? What with
enjoyments, or with life itself, (if we slew these relatives) ?

4 Hore, and at shl. 34, relations of every kind are mentioned, to give more
effect to Arjuna’s feelings, but those of which we know are comparatively few.
Bhisbma, as great-uncle to both Kurus and Pandavas, may be placed among tho

ndfathers. Dhritarashtra was uncle to the sons of Pandu, Drupada their
Jaw, and Dhrishtadyumna, his son, their brother-in-law. Lastly, Karna
brother to Arjuna. Morcover the principal actors in each party were

25 Arjuna,—See Index.

% ‘This i guito an Indian modo of depicting horror. We forid Europeans
would say, "My face grows pale;’ but the swarthy Hindd, not seeing the effect on
account of his colour, has recourse to the feeling of the blood rushing back from
the surface, and leaving the fuco dry and bloodless.

27 Ghndéva is tho namo of the miraculous bow which Arjuna received as a gift
from Indra. :

2 This may be taken literally, as birdy te eetually poping before Arune's
eyes; or, figuratively, as referring’ to his fears for the event of the battle. 1 con-
fess ‘the context immediately following favours the latter acceptation: the
scholiasts throw no light on the matter.


===== PAGE 145 / 300 =====

6 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIRST.

Those very men—on whose account® we might desire a
kingdom, enjoyments, or pleasures—are assembled for battle,
having given up their lives and riches. Teachers, fathers,
and even sons, and grandfathers, uncles, fathers-in-law,
grandsons, brothers-in-law, with connections also—these I
would not wish to slay, though I were slain myself,® O killer
of Madhu!—not even for the sake of the sovereignty of the
triple world,*' how much less for that of this earth! When
we had killed the Dhartardshtras, what pleasure should we
have, O thou who art prayed to by mortals?** We should
incur a crime were we to put to death these villains.
Therefore we are not right to kill the Dhértar4shtras, our
own relations, for how could we be happy, after killing our
own kindred, O slayer of Madhu?

‘Even if they whose reason is obscured by covetousness do
not perceive the crime committed in destroying their own
tribe, nor a sin in the oppression of their friends, should we
not know how to recoil from such a sin—we, who do look
upon the slaughter of one’s tribe as a crime, O thou who art
supplicated by mortals? In the destruction of a tribe, the
eternal institutions (laws) of the tribe are destroyed. These
laws being destroyed, lawlessness prevails throughout the
whole tribe. From the existence of lawlessness the women
of the tribe become corrupted, Krishna; and when the women
are corrupted, O son of Vrishni! confusion of caste takes

2 Since he deems these pleasures only enjoyable when surrounded and partaken
by relations.

% Though my life depended on it,

% Earth, the firmament and heaven, the last including also the regions of the
demons. The sovereignty of this triple world was Viybnu's, he having gained it
by artifice from Bali inthe form of a tiny dwarf, Seo Jude under * Vighus

3% The first meaning of the root ard is ‘to trouble,’ from which"the gram-
rarians, followed by Bopp, have translated this word *the troubler of (bad) Suen

33 This word is explained as comprising six species of villains, viz. incendiaries,
Boinoners, cut-throat telers of property, robbers of ones andy or one's wie a
of which pleasant and fondly parted been, ncording Yo Sbdarasvdmiy tho
scholiast, filled by the Kurus against the Pandavas,


===== PAGE 146 / 300 =====

THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA. ‘

place.* Confusion of caste is (a gate) to hell® both for the
destroyers of the tribe, and for the tribe itself. For their
fathers are deprived of the rites of funeral-cakes and libations
of water, and thus fall (from heayen).% By the crimes of
the destroyers of a tribe, and by those who cause confusion of
caste, the eternal institutions of caste and tribe® are sub-

M The women, for instance, whose husbands, friends, or relations, have been all
slain in battle, no longer restrained by law, seck husbands among other and lower
castes or tribes, causing a mixture of blood, which many nations at alt ages have
regarded as a most serious evil ; but particularly those who—like the Aryans, the
Jews and the Scotch—were at first surrounded by foreigners very different to
themselves, and thus preserved the distinction and genealogies of their races more
effectively than any other.

38 A distinction is to be made between Naraka and P&téla, at least according
to the Puranas. In them Naraka only is the place of punishment for mortals,
Patéla boing the region immediately below the earth, which is inhabited by all
tho ‘opposition’ of the Hind@ Pantheon, the Daityas, Dénavas, Yakshas,
Nagas, ete. It is divided into seven regions, placed one below the other; and if
we may credit the account of the Muni Narada, who, like Orpheus, went down to
the regions below, the evil genii take great care to provide most comfortably for
their bodily and sensual enjoyments, and make their habitation far more attractive
than the cold virtue of Swarga. Thus the daughters of the demons wander about
lavish of their fascinations ; the sun shines for light, and not for heat; the demons
themselves revel on excellent dinners and the best cellars, attended by bands
of music and the songs of the Koil /Cucnlus Fndicus), the nightingale of India
(see Wilson's ‘Vishnu Purina,’ p. 204). Naraka is a very different place. It is
said to consist of twenty-cight, and sometimes of many more divisions, each more
terrible than the last, and allotted to the punishment of different crimes. For a
descriptipn, see ‘Vishnu Purina,’ p. 207.

3 In bringing forward these and other melancholy superstitions of Brahmanism
in the mouth @f Arjuna, we are not to suppose that our poet—though as much
Bréhman as philosopher in many unimportant points of belief— himself received
and approved of them. ‘The present is one of those deplorable perversions of
common sense which make the happiness, and even salvation of the dead, depend
on the practice of the living, and which are found in many churches where the
hierarchy have had recourse even to menaces, to enforce their injunctions on an
ignorant and superstitious populace. For a full account of the ceremonies here
alluded to we must refer the reader to Colebrooke’s ‘Essays,’ vol. i. p. 187, etc.,
and vol. ii. p. 363; and to the ‘ Asiatic Rescarches,’ vol. vii. p. 245. It is only
necessary here to state that the Shraddha was a funeral ceremony performed at
different periods by the nearest relatives of the deceased, and for fathers, grand-
fathers, and great-grandfathers, It consisted in offering libations of pure water,
and of Pindas (balls of meat or rice mixed with curds). The latter were offered
for dead relatives generally, once a month at the new moon ; or for one who had
just died, during the ten days of mourning, one on the first, two on the second,
three on thg third day, and so on. The former were included in the daily duties
of tho householder. “The neglect of their performance would cause the dead
to quit their residence in heaven, and be precipitated into Naraka. See Manu, iii,
120—280 ; and Yajnavalkya, i, 217—226, and 249-257, «

3 ‘The women who marry men of other castes.
24 The ecolist explains jdti by varna, ‘caste,’ Fula being rather ‘family’ or
“tribes



===== PAGE 147 / 300 =====

8 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIRST.

versed. We have learnt (from sacred writ) that a sojourn”
in hell necessarily awaits the men who subvert the institutions
of their tribe, O Krishna! Alas! we have determined to
commit a great crime, since, from the desire of sovereignty
and pleasures, we are prepared to slay our own kin. Better
were it for me, if the Dhartar4shtras, being armed, would
slay me, harmless and unresisting, in the fight.’

SANJAYA SPOKE.

Having thus spoken in the midst of the battle, Arjuna,
whose heart was troubled with grief, let fall his bow and
arrow, and sat down on the bench of the chariot.

Thus in the Upanishads, called the holy Bhagavad-Gité,
in the science of the Supreme Spirit, in the book of devotion,
in the colloquy between the holy Krishna and Arjuna,
(stands) the first chapter by name

‘THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA.’*

38 Which, like the residence of the good in Ieaven, laste only for a period
commensurate with their crimes; after which they are born again on earth in the
bodies of animals, etc.

© This title is much longer in the Berlin MS., and shorter in No. 6 of the
Paris MSS. There is little doubt, says Lasson, that the division of our poem into
chapters or readings /adhyciya) was the work of the author himself, since a division
of the sense almost always accompanies it; but the titles have, been added by
wordy copyists, who revel in long flourishing announcements, but do not always
succeed in suiting the title to the contents.” Each of these titles describes the
Bhagavad-Gith in its divers characters, Lassen suggests the translation of
Upanighad by ‘episode,’ viz, of the MahdbhGrata, as not even the pride of the
copyists would have dared to rank our pocm among the Upanishads of the Vedas.


===== PAGE 148 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE SECOND.

SANJAYA SPOKE. -

To him thus filled with compassion, with his troubled eyes
full of tears, and sunk in grief, the slayer of Madhu spoke
these words:

THE HOLY ONE! sPOKE.

‘Wherefore, Arjuna, has this dejection in matters of
difficulty come upon thee, so unworthy of the honourable,
and leading neither to heaven? nor to glory? Do not give
way to weakness, 0 King! That does not become thee! But
cast off this mean effeminacy of heart, and arise, O tormentor
of thy foes!’

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘How should I, slayer of Madhu! contend in battle with
my shafts against Bhishma and Drona, both worthy to be
honoured, O slayer of thy foes? For it were better to eat
even the bread of beggary in this world, and not to slay
these venerable? men of great esteem. But were I to slay
these venerable men here, though they long for plunder, I

Krishna,

2 Since i@ deprived him of tho chance of being slain in butte, which would
havo expedited his journey to the regions of bliss,

3 Lit, ‘Preceptors’ ; but since Drona is the only one, at least of whom we
know, andgho rather an defdrya than a guru, wo prefer to take this word in
fa moto gencral sense. ‘The guru, or spiritual teacher, was always » Bréhmap;
and, to teach others, must himself be learned, old in years, and of high authority.
The Brahmans were the most honoured caste, and the gur® the most honoured
Brihman ; thus the name becomes one of great distinction, and would be applied
generally to such men os Bhighma and Dhritarightra, the grand-uncle and uncle
of Arjuna,


===== PAGE 149 / 300 =====

10 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SECOND.

should eat of banquets smeared with blood. Nor can we tell
which of these two things may be better for us—that we
should conquer them or they conquer us. Those very men,
the Dhértaréshtras, whom if we slay we shall not wish to live
ourselves, are drawn up opposite to us. As I am of a dis-
position which is affected by compassion and the fear of
doing wrong, and my mind being bewildered by my duty,*
I ask thee which it is better todo? Tell me that distinctly!
Iam thy disciple.5 Teach me, who now implore thee! For
I do not sée what can dispel this grief, which scorches my
senses,° even were I to obtain the complete unrivalled
sovereignty of the earth, and the command even of the
deities.’
SANJAYA SPOKE.

Arjuna, the harasser of his focs, having thus addressed
Krishna, having said to Govinda, ‘I will not fight,’ was
silent. Then, between the two armies, Krishna, smiling,
addressed these words to him thus downcast :

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Thou hast grieved for those who need not be grieved for,
but thou utterest words of wisdom!? The wise grieve hot for
dead or living. But never at any period did I, or thou, or

« Bewildered as to what it ia my duty to do in this case.

5 ‘This must not be taken literally. Arjuna, as the bosom friend of Krishna,
cannot be considered as his disciple, but places himself in that relationship to him
from a consciousness of his own ignorance how to act, and Krishna's ability
to instruct him. ‘Through the poetical portraying of his struggle between duty
‘and feeling, we mark the Brahman in our author, who, ever mindful of the
didactic nature of his poem, describes his hero as a devoted folluwer of the
institutions of his law and religion,

© Lit,, ‘Dries up my senses.’ It must be understood as ‘paralyses, obseures my
fecaltes of perception,’ the fueulty boing used for the pore itself, The
tenses, indriydni) are here, in tho, strigt meaning of the English word, the
faculties of perception, not those of judgment and reason; but as the latter aro
influenced by the application of the former to external objects, the concrete may
be here rendered by the abstract.

7 Namely, In what he has said concerning the destruction of a tribe and tho
confusion of ‘caste, He has spoken with judgment, but is nevertheless mistaken,



===== PAGE 150 / 300 =====

APPLICATION TO THE SANKHYA DOCTRINE. Il

these kings of men, not exist, nor shall any of us at any time
henceforward cease to exist. As the soul in this body
undergoes the changes of childhood, prime, and age,? so it
obtains a new body (hereafter) ;° a sensible man is not
troubled about that. But the contact of the elements, O son
of Kunti! which bring cold and heat, pleasure and pain,”
which come and go, and are temporary, these do thou
endure,!? O Bhérata! For that man whom, being the same in
pain and pleasure, and ever constant,'’ these elements do not
afflict, O best of men! is fitted for immortality. “There is no
existence for what does not exist, nor is there any non-
existence for what exists.° But even of both of these, those
who discern the truth perceive the true end.'* Know this,
that that by which all this universe is created” is inde-

® The first philosophical tenet of our poem, the Eternity and Immortality
of the Soul, which has had no beginning and will have no end.

® Childbood comprehends boyhood also, prime is youth and manhood, age the

riod after the turn of life. Compare ‘ Hitopadesha,’ i. 113, where childhood is
iimited to the age when a girl is marriageable.

© The second philosophical tenet, the Mortality and Mutability of the Body;
and the third, the Transmigration of the Soul, are here established. The body ‘is
virtually changed in the different ages of man, though the change is gradual.
‘Transmigration affects the soul no more than these changes; it is merely a more
marked and sudden change, -

11 It is well do observe the order of these four words, which, when they are
used together, is generally preserved. Pleasure corresponds to cold, pain to
‘heat—a curious contrast of Hindi ideas to those of our northern chilly climes,

12 In such a manner that both shall be alike and the difference imperceptible,
He here and in the next shloka introduces at once the chief doctrine of practical
Yoga, the impassibility to be acquired towards all external influence.

13 And of equanimity in regard to the internal influences of passion.

4 Union with the Supreme Spirit at the final emancipation, which is the only
rea} immortality, since even heaven and the gods must have an end.

18 The only real existence is cternal existence, that of spirit. Matter does not
really cxist, but is merely the production of Mayé, the mystic power by which the
Supreme Béing has created an illusive and temporary matter, which seems to
exist, but does not really do so. ‘There is then no real existence for matter, nor
non-existence for spirit, which alone really exists. .

16 Schlegel renders the word antas by ‘discrimen,’ Wilkins by ‘destination.’
‘The meaning of the passage is obscure, but I confess I sce no way of translating
it correctly but that which is here adopted. The end and object of the connection
of spirit with matter, the philosopher knows to be the emaitcipation of the soul,
which is effected thereby. See Introduction, A., Parts I, and i.

1 Lit, ‘expanded.’ It is a purely philosophical use of the word, and alludes
to the doctrine that the Supreme Being is at the same time the efficient and


===== PAGE 151 / 300 =====

12 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SECOND.

structible."® No one can cause the destruction of this
inexhaustible thing. These finite bodies have been said to
belong to an eternal, indestructible and infinite spirit.
Therefore fight, O Bharata! He who believes that this spirit
can kill, and he who thinks that it can be killed, both of
these are wrong in judgment. It neither kills, nor is killed.
It is not born, nor dies at any time. It has had no origin,
nor will it ever have an origin. Unborn, changeless, eternal
both as to future and past time, it is not slain when the
body is killed. How can that man, O son of Prithé! who
knows that it is indestructible, constant, unborn, and
inexhaustible (really) cause the death of anybody, or kill
anybody himself! As a man abandons worn-out clothes, and
takes other new ones, so does the soul quit worn-out bodies,
and enter other new ones. Weapons cannot cleave it. Fire
cannot burn it, nor can water wet it, nor can wind dry it.”
It is impenetrable, incombustible, incapable of moisture, and
also of drying. It is constant, capable of going everywhere,
firm, immoveable, and eternal. It is said®! to be invisible,
incomprehensible, immutable. Therefore, knowing it to be
such, thou art not right to grieve for it. And even if thou
deem” it born with the body and dying with the body,* still,

material cause of the universe. The essence of matter /prakyiti or mdyd) is an
inherent portion of the Supreme Being himself. ‘This he causes to emanate from
himself in the form of matter, and hence the use of the word ¢atam (root tan)
‘stretched out, developed.’ The more usual word for the idea of creation is sr,
which in like manner signifies ‘to send forth, to cause to come forth, emanate,’
but this root has received the force of more ¢ficient creation, and tatam is
therefore preferable in the strict philosophical sense of ‘ cause to emanate.’

1 The fourth philosophical tenet is hore exhibited, the Existence of a Supreme
Spirit, to whom to refer the existence of the universe (tat sarvam). |

1 Purdna means, literally, ‘ancient,’ but, in opposition to shdshwata, ‘eternal
as to the fature,’ it undoubtedly means “ternal as to the past, without beginning,’

% A poetical mode of expressing that matter has no direct influence on spirit.
2 In former philosophical treatises, as those of Kapila and Ishwara Krishna.

2 He now adopts a newline of argument. Waiving the immortality of the
soul for the sake of dtgument, he exhorts him not to pity his enemies because they
are about to die, since that is the fate of all alike.

% Lit., ‘Constantly born and constantly dying ;’ that is, born and dying with
every new body which it entera,


===== PAGE 152 / 300 =====

APPLICATION TO THE SANKHYA DOCTRINE. 13

O great-armed one! thou art not right to grieve for it. For
to everything born death is certain, to everything dead
regeneration is certain. Therefore thou art not right to
grieve for a thing which is inevitable. All things which
exist are invisible in their primeval state, visible in their
intermediate state, and again invisible in their final state.*
‘What cause it there for bewailing in this? ‘One looks on the
soul as a miracle, another speaks of it as a miracle, another
hears of it as a miracle, but even when he has heard of
it, not one comprehends it.2° The soul in every creature’s
body is always invulnerable. Therefore thou art not right
to grieve for any creatures. And considering thine own
duty (as a Kshatriya), thou art not right to waver. For there
is nothing better for a Kshatriya than lawful war.” Happy
are the warriors who undertake such a war as is spontane-
ously offered them—an open door to heaven.* But if thou
wilt not join in this lawful fight, thou abandonest thine own
duty and glory, and contractest a crime. And mankind will
moreover relate of thee imperishable infamy. And to a noble

% Tho,intermodiate state is this life, in which the soul is invested with a body
visible to’man, and before and after which it is invisible to man. Bhitdnt might
equally refer to material objects, and the sentence to the doctrine of the
emanation of papable matter from the material essence (avyakta, prakriti), and
its ro-ontrance into it at the dissolution, It would then be ‘translated’ all
material objects have the undeveloped principle (avyakta) as their origin, de-
veloped matter /ryakta) as their middle state, and again the undeveloped
principle as their final condition.”

% This is merely a declaration of the difficulty of comprehending the soul.
Three grades of students are distinguished, first, he who has arrived by the

ractice of Yoga at what may be compared to the actual power of mentally
holding the soul ; secondly, the philosopher who teaches concerning it;
thirdly, his studious disciple.

2 «Not fay all,’ is often equivalent in Sanskrit to ‘not for any.’

% Again he adopts a now lino of argument, and reminds that the duty of the
caste to which he belongs should out-balance all other considerations. ‘The duty
of the Brahman was study, and the teaching of religion; that of the Kshatriya,
government,and the subjection of one’s enemi fn short the protection, internal
and external, of one's country; that of the Vaishya, commerce and agriculture;
and that of the Shdra, faithful service of his master, Arjuna was a Kehatri
by birth, and it was therefore a crime in him to neglect those ‘duties on which the
safety of his party depended, particularly at such a crisis,

28 Tt was believed that the warrior who died in battle was carried at once to
Indra's heaven.


===== PAGE 153 / 300 =====

14 BHAGAVAD-GiITA. CHAPTER TH® SECOND.

man infamy is worse® than death. The great warriors will
think that thou hast retired from the battle out of fear, and
thou wilt undergo the contempt of those by whom thou wast
greatly esteemed.” And many abusive words will thine
enemies utter, sneering at thy prowess. What can be more
wretched than that? If slain thou wilt go to Heaven, or if
victorious thou wilt enjoy the earth. Therefore arise, O son
of Kunti! Make up thy mind for the fight. Looking on
pleasure or pain, gain or loss, victory or defeat, as the same,
gird thyself for the battle. And thus thou wilt not incur
sin. This opinion has been set before thee in accordance with
S4nkhya (rational) doctrine. Now hear it in accordance
with Yoga (devotional) doctrine.3! Imbued with that opinion
thou wilt discard these bonds of action,3? O son of Prithé. In

® Wilkins, followed by Schlegel in his first edition, translates atirichyate as if
it signified ‘lasts long after.’ Chézy discovered the fallacy, and in his second
edition Schlegel has profited by his remarks. We refer those who wish to pursue
the question in its details to Chézy’s critique on Schlegel’s edition in the ‘ Journal
des Savans,’ Paris, 1825, and Schlegel’s reply (‘Journal Asiatique,' vol. ix. 1826),
and to the latter's note on this word.

% Lit., ‘And whose contempt thou wilt incur, from having been greatly
esteemed——” leaving the sentence unfinished, without any independent sentence
to correspond to the relative one. ‘This ditficulty might be removed by supplying
another word for cha and referring yeshin to mahdrathds; while Schlegel and
Lassen suggest eshin for yeshdn, or abhir dydayasi for blitwd yisyasi. None of
these conjectures, however, are supported by the MSS.

3! Undoubtedly the names by which the two schools of philosophy were known
are here intended in the words Sankhya and Yoga; but at the same time it must
be remembered what idca those words conveyed, even when used as names of
these systems, to the Hindé mind. hus the Siukbya was so calied from its
purely speculative and theoretical nature; the Yoga, while more practical, if not
‘wholly ethical in its tendency, was mainly distinguished by its inculeating yoga,
or a spiritual union with the Supreme Being effected by meditation and mortifi-
cation, which we may at once term ‘devotion.’ Krishna alludes, in mentioning
Sankhya, to the broad philosophical principles which he has been hitherto
explaining, the immortality of the soul, its transmigrations and so.forth, which
the Yoga system held in common with the Sankhya; but the peculiar tonets of
the Yoga are henceforth to be explained and used as a consolation and encourage-
ment for Arjuna,

% The ‘bonds of action’ /karmabandha) recur so often throughout our poem,
that we cannot refrain from reiterating in brief form the explanation which has
aiready been given in the Introduction. In Indian philosophy all actions that
were undertaken wRh,an interested motive, whether to ebtain somo earth]
advantage and gratify some selfish desire, or with the hope that they woul
be rewarded by admittance to Heaven, were believed to implicate the actor in
Certain necessary consequences. ‘The principal of these was earthly regeneration,



===== PAGE 154 / 300 =====

APPLICATION TO THE SANKHYA DOCTRINE. 15

this (system of Yoga) there is no destruction of nor detriment
to one’s efforts;%> even a little of this religious practice
delivers one from great risk. In this (system) there is only
one single object of a steady constant nature, O son of Kuru!
Those who do not persevere have objects with many ramifi-
cations and without end.® Not®* disposed to meditation and
perseverance is the intention of those who are devoted to
enjoyments and dominion, and whose minds are seduced
(from the right path) by that flowery® sentence which is
proclaimed by the unwise, who delight in texts from the
Vedas, O son of Prithé, and say, “There is nothing else than
that,” being covetous-minded, and considering heaven as
the very highest good;*® and which offers regeneration as the

the very evil which philosophy was intended to assist in avoidin
ment in subsequent lives on earth of many of our actions in this life.
took such firm root in the Hindd mind, always tending towards fatalism, that we
find in works where philosophy has not the slightest part, that the speaker
consoles himself for afflicting events by the comfortable reflection that they are
merely the punishment of actions performed in a previous existence. .

3 Efforts made for the accomplishment of some worldly and selfish plan are
always more or less liable to destruction and detriment. Even if the object
de aitained, the enjoyment can never Inst. This constitutes destruction, and the
attempt to atiain our object always mects with more or less of impediment, | But
the effurts made in the practice of Yoga all tend to one object,—the emancipation
of the soil from material life. This, when gained, is eternal, and our efforts
towards its attainment can meet with no obstruction, since the actions we perform
will not affect if? whether they are successful or not, being performed without
regard to their success or failure.

‘4 The risk of failure which must always attend carthly efforts.

3% In the practice of devotion the one single object is the emancipation of the
goul. In workly ations the objects are ex many as our desires, and subdivided by
intrigue. The word duddAi, which we here render ‘ object,’ is literally ‘intelli-
gence, mental activity.’ It'is often used for some particular mode of thought,
spinion, and again for that which constantly engages the thoughts, ‘plan, inten
tion, object.’

% This is an instance of the puzzling complication of the relative construction
jn Sanskrit, which always begins with the dependent phrase. We are forod to
begin with SIM. 44, in order to render the meaning intelligible.

37 Dughpita, ‘flowery,’ and is explained by the scholiast to mean ‘pleasant,
‘until it falls,’ in contrast to fruit, which yields a more substantial and durable
pleasure. Te whole passage is probably directed against the Parva Miminsi
school, which puts such faith in obedience to the practical injunctions of
the Vedas.

%8 The Judaists of India, who believe that the letter of Holy Writ will
save them.

3 Hoaven /swarga) being really nothing but a temporary residence, and, like
the rost of matter, subject to destruction, the only highest good being emanci-
pation. .



===== PAGE 155 / 300 =====

16 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER TH® SECOND.

reward of actions,” and enjoins many different ceremonies for
the eake of obtaining pleasures and dominion. The subject
of the Vedas is the three qualities... O Arjuna! be thou free
from these three qualities, free from the ordinary influence of
natural opposites,“* reposing on eternal truth, free from
worldly anxieties, self-possessed. As many uses as there are
in a tank filled with waters which flow together from every
quarter, so many are there in all the Vedas to a sensible
Bréhman.“ Let then the motive for action be in the action
itself, never in its reward. Do not be incited to actions by
(the hope of their) reward only, nor yet indulge a propensity
to inertness.‘> Persisting in devotion, and laying aside

4 Tt incites us to good actions, with the promise of being born in a future life
in a superior condition to our present one.

41 The three qualities (grout) are treated ofa fll length in| Ch. XVII. They
were irresistible influences, which were supposed to accompany all matter, to com-
pose the dispositions of mon, according to the proportions in which they were
united, and to be the causes of the superiority and inferiority of all things ;
in short, the inherent principles of good and evil, They wore,—first, eatt
‘reality, ‘truth, goodness ;” second, rajes, ‘impulse, adtivity, badness ;? third, tamas,
‘obscurity, ignorance, sioth, indifference.” “In warning Arjuna to avoid them, he
means that he should detect and repulse their influence in all his actions and
passions, and act from reason, not from impulse.

© Dwandwa is hit. ‘a pair,’ thence a pair composed of any one thing and its
opposite, such as cold and heat, Pleasure and pain, Jove and hnte,cfe. His
injunetion amounts to a command to acquire perfect equanimity. “The word
sattwa in the following compound has been referred by some fo the Set of the
three qualities, and virdwandica translated in conscquonce, ‘fre from the other
two qualities,’ viz. rajes and tamax (sce Langlois’ critique in the ‘Journal
Asiatique,’ vol. iv. 1824, p. 240, ete.) Dwandwa, however, will not bear this
meaning, and Krishna has warned Arjuna to avoid ald three quali Nor can
they be separated, as will be seen in Ch. XVII. ‘Their action is always mingled and
united, though one of the three always predominates.

© Yoga-kshema is a law term, meaning a contract made between two parties,
by which one undertakes to guard or insure any property, or even the life of the
other, for a certain consideration, Hence it acquires the force of anxiety for one’s
Property, for one’s worldly interests generally. See Manu, vii. 127, and viii. 230,

4 Asa full tank of frosh water may be used for drinking, baihing, washing
one’s clothes, and numerous other purposes, so tho text of the Vedse may. be
turned to any object of sclf-interest by a Brahman who is well acquainted with
them, and knows how to wield them. “We may exemplify this general fact by the
uses made of texts from our own Scriptures in the mouths of the Pyritans on the
one hand, and of the Cavaliers on the other. Our author must not, however, be
understood to reject the use of the Vedas by what he here says. He merely
advises a careful use of them. Kapila himself admits them as a last source of
proof of the truth when others fail.

4 He urges throughout the poem the necessity and excellence of action, and
Wishes it to be understood that action is injurious only when undertaken with
selfish motives.



===== PAGE 156 / 300 =====

APPLICATION TO THE SANKHYA DOCTRINE. 17

covetousness, perform thy actions, O despiser of wealth!
being the same in success or failure. Equanimity is called
devotion “ (Yoga). For by far inferior is the performance
of works‘? to mental devotion, O despiser of wealth! Seek
a refuge in thy mind. Wretched are they whose impulse
to action is its reward. He who is mentally devoted
dismisses (by means of Yoga‘) alike successful and unsuc-
cessful results. Therefore give thyself up to devotion.
Devotion is success in actions. For those who are mentally
devoted and wise, renouncing the reward which is the result
of their actions, and liberated from the necessity of regenera-
tion, attain to that place which is free from all disease.!?
When thy mind shall have worked through the snares of
delusion, then wilt thou attain to indifference to the doctrines,
which are either (already) received or have yet to be re-
ceived.” When thy mind, once liberated from the Vedas,>!

46 ‘The spiritual state, rather than the doctrine itself, is here alluded to. Yoga,
derived from the root yw), ‘to join,’ it should be remembered, originally signifies
‘junction,’ that is, union of the soul with the Supreme Being by means of
devotion. .

41 Byen of religious duties, sacrifice, mortification, ete., but only when under-
faken from some selfish motive, whether personal’ aggrandisement, or future
happiness.

48 By these words I have rendered sha (lit. ‘horo,") which alludes to the
doctrines of which he is speaking.

4 He here asserta for his systema.what is gencrally asserted in the outest in
most collections of Sutras cr philosophi maxims—the power of releasing its
follower from the necessity of transmigratia and ensuring his final emancipation.
"The word andmaya is well c)hosen to expressthe state of union of the soul with
the Supreme Spirit. While}, in a philosopie point, of view, it contrasts real
immortality with the apparefat immortalityof tho gods, who, however, were not
only destined to perish in thfe final dissoltion, but could even (as in the case of
{ndra) pine away and loee thfoir porer 1h consequence of the curse of some sancti-
fied mortal, if expresses perfeu:t batitude in a physical point of viow to the mind
of the Hindd, whose climate seldom left him long free from sickness.

80 Those which have boon received or heard are the Vedas; the others, the
philosophic systems, ‘The root shru means to ‘hear traditionally, and accept ;°
tiruta is cofstantly used for the doctrines of the Vedas, as ampiti is for their
ritual. Shrotavya is thon that which, as they say, should be accepted ; or the
construction put on the Vedas by the schools which undertake to elucidate them,
as the Miménsé and Vedinta, .¢

#1 Hewillintroduge the doctrines and rules for practi of his estom tll he has
thoroughly destroyed all reliance on those of the established religion and its
tort hank



===== PAGE 157 / 300 =====

18 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SECOND.

shall remain unwavering, and constant in contemplation, then
shalt thou attain to devotion.’

ARJUNA SPOKE.

“What is the description of one confirmed in spiritual
knowledge, and constant in contemplation, O Krishna? How
does a man of steady meditation converse P How does he act
when at rest, how when in action P’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘When he has put away all desires which enter the heart,
and is satisfied by himself in himself, he is then said to be
confirmed in spiritual knowledge. When his heart is not
troubled in adversities, and all enjoyment in pleasures is fled ;
when he is free from passion, fear and anger, and constant in
meditation, he is called a “Muni.” That man possesses
spiritual knowledge who is free from desire towards any
object, and neither delights in nor is averse from whatever he
meets with, be it good or bad. And when he draws in his
senses from the objects of sense, even as a tortoise draws
together its limbs on each side,*! he is possessed of spiritual
knowledge. The objects of sense turn away from a man who
refrains from food. Even appetite turns away when it
perceives his extreme freedom from appetite.» For often the

. . AVIT. Thou
& Having established Yoga as the predominates.e only, means of obtaining
final emancipation, he proceeds t0 gning a contrac! the man who practises it.
Bhagha is lit. ‘ specch,’ but its exprsnsure any pro’ Scholiast as lakshana, ‘dis-
tinguishing mark,’ avoids all redun if aoquires mediately follows.
% This name is not confined to the wir. See 3f this sect. It is generally
applied to all rehgious devotees, and more c ,.illy to those who, Ay come
prescribed course of abstraction and mortification, generally performed in the
jungle, have acquired a state of semi-spiritualism. Here, where perfect equa-
nimity and impassibility are the necessary conditions, it should be taken in its
widest sense, that of a saintly personage.

& As a tortoise draws in its head and feet under its shell, and thins preserves
them from external influences of all kinds, the devotee should keep his senses
within himself, unaffected by the objects which surround him. ‘That ia, by com-
Plete dominion over te senses, he should not allow external objects to affect his

art through them.

% This would seem to be nothing more than a personification of the obj

+ of sense and of appetite, meant to show that after a complete subjugation of his



===== PAGE 158 / 300 =====

APPLICATION TO THE SANKHYA DOCTRINE. 19

agitated senses of a prudent man, even though he strive (to
subdue them), carry off his heart by violence. Let a man,
restraining all these, remain in devotion when at rest, and
intent on me alone. - For he, whose senses are under his
control, possesses spiritual knowledge. Attachment to objects
of sense arises in a man who meditates upon them; from
attachment arises desire; from desire passion springs up ;
from passion comes bewilderment; from bewilderment, con-
fusion of the memory;*' from confusion of the memory,
destruction of the intellect ; from destruction of the intellect,
he perishes. But he who approaches the objects of sense
with senses free from love and hate, and beneath his own
control, having his soul well-disposed, attains to tranquillity
of thought. In this tranquillity there springs up in hima
separation from all troubles. For the mind of him whose
thoughts are tranquil soon becomes fixed (on one object).
He who does not practise devotion has neither intelligence
nor reflection. And he who does not practise reflection has
no calm. How can a man without calm obtain happiness?
‘When a man’s heart is disposed in accordance with his
roaming senses, it snatches away his spiritual knowledge as
the wind does a ship on the waves. Therefore, O great-

senses and desires, the restraint itself becomos so much the easier, since those very
abject and that very appetite seem to have lost their influence and effect upon the
levotee.

% Lit., ‘Sit in devotion,’ ete, in answer to Arjuna’s question, ‘How does
he act when at rest ?”

51 Confusion of memory implies forgetfulness of his duty ; and destruction of the
intellect entails loss of his senses, folly, under the influence of which he acts
wrongly and gbsurdly, and hence commits sins, which are recomponsed with hell
and destruction.

58 When the thoughts quit worldly objects, the mind is secured from fear and
anxiety, and fixed on the one object of pious meditation, the Supreme Being.

% A fine Poetic simile. ‘The ship is tossed about by tho waves, and the waves
are raised by the wind. ‘The ship is man’s knowledge, which should be directed
towards its haven, the Supreme Being. The senses which wander here and there
after every pleasant object are the waves, and the heart whith directs them to
those objects by its desires is the wind. The senses toss the mind about, and the
heart with its passions at length wrecks and destroys it, as the wind doos the
vessel. The simile is interesting as one of the proofs of the state of civilization


===== PAGE 159 / 300 =====

20 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SECOND.

armed one! he is possessed of spiritual knowledge whose
senses are entirely withheld from objects of sense. The self-
governed man is awake in that which is night to all (other)
beings; that in which other beings are awake is night to the’
self-governed.® He into whom all desires enter in the same
manner as rivers enter the ocean, which is (always) full, yet
does not move its bed, can obtain tranquillity," but not he
who loves desires. That man who, casting off all desires, acts
without interest, free from egotism and selfishness, attains to
tranquillity. This is the condition of the Supreme Being,
O son of Prithé! Having obtained this, one is not troubled ;
and remaining in it, even at the time of death, he passes on
to extinction ® in the Supreme Spirit.’

Thus in the Upanishads, ctc.,*! (stands) the Second Chapter,
by name

‘APPLICATION TO THE SANKHYA DOCTRINE.’

prevailing at the period when our poem was composed. Our author belonged
undoubtedly to an inland district, perhaps many hundred Tengues from the sea, yet
such was the communication over the vast continent that he had at least heard
described, if he had not himself scen, the wreck of a yessel on the sea.

© Spiritual knowledge is as dark and mysterious as night to the world, though
the devotee is there at home and sees clearly, whilst worldly interests, in which
mankind see their way distinctly as in the day-time, are dark and unknown to the
devotee, practising abstraction in the jungl ‘

& He whom all desires enter without exciting or affecting any more than rivers
flow into the ocean, which, though it is already full, docs not make it extend its
limits, ete,

© Namely tranquillity /sidnti), by which we must here understand what
Kapila calls yécanmukti, a state of mukti, or separation of the soul from the body,
which takes place even during life. The soul is not really and actually 60
separated, but is virtually so since the influence of the body upon it is entirely
destroyed. In describinig it as the state of the Supreme Spirit (Brahma), ho
means that the soul is equally free from the influence of matter as that Spirit, and,
in short, in the same state as if actually united to it.

 Lit., ‘blowing out,’ is the complete union of the soul with* the Supreme
Spirit, the loss of its individuality, and its amalgamation with the one Being.

is, a8 being the only state of real happiness, the only one of immortality, is the
aim and object of Hindi philosophy,

It is useless to repeat the formula at the cnd of cach chapter, and we content
ourselves with the title. This, like most of the others, is rendered difficult by the
introduction of the word Yoga, without any apparent uso, merely to recall that
that school is here treated of, Ae it is one of those words whose meanings are
numberless, it is introduced without difficulty, and must here bear the translation
we give it,



===== PAGE 160 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE THIRD.

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘If thought be deemed by thee, O thou who art invoked

by mortals! superior to action,' why then dost thou direct

me to this dreadful deed? Thou bewilderest my mind by

thy ambiguous words. Tell me therefore one only thing
for certain, by which I may obtain happiness.’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘J have already declared to thee,’ sinless one! that there
were two modes of life‘ in this world—that of the followers
of the Sankhya (rational) school in devotion through spiritual
knowledge, and that of the followers of the Yoga (devotional)
school in devotion through works.®> Without undertaking

1 See Chapter IT. 49. -

2 Krishna hag always been exhorting him to perform deeds worthy of a warrior,
but has also told him that mental devotion 1s superior to action, Arjuna is
naturally bewildered as to which to prefer, in order to ensure his salvation and yet
do his duty. .

3 Chapter II. 39.

4 Of philosophic and therefore salutary life.

5 In drawing the distinction between the two schools, and attributing know-
ledge as the watchword of salvation to the one,—‘action,’ properly undertaken,
as that of the other,—Krishna must not be understood to separate the schools
themselves, but merely their comprebension of the means of salvation. All the
metaphysical and physiclogical, and even a part of the theological, doctrines of the
two schools avere quite similar, and were received by the Yoga from the Sankhya;
but while the former offers, as the means of salvation, action performed without
worldly interest, and devotion consisting in meditation, contemplation, and self-
dominion, the latter bids us renounce action as uscless, and rave recourse to

‘ritual kwowledge. ‘This knowledge is the clear comprehension of the nature of

1e universe and of the object of man, by the soul, received through the body, and
fas this is not merely obtained by the study of Kapila’s Sitras, or shiva
Krishna's shlokas, devotion, contemplation, and effort must be employed for that
‘object. We have, therefore, thought fit to translate the Word Yoga in both com-
pounds by ‘devotion,’ though the first compound might have equally well been
rendered ‘ application to knowledge.’


===== PAGE 161 / 300 =====

22 BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE THIRD.

actions a man cannot enjoy freedom from action,’ nor does he
arrive at perfection from renunciation (of actions) only.” For
one can never for a single moment even exist without doing
some action. For every one is forced, even against his will,
to perform an action by the qualities which spring from
nature.® He who remains inert, restraining the organs of
action,? and pondering with his heart on objects of sense, is
called a false pietist of bewildered soul. But he who, re-
straining his senses by his heart,!° and being free from
interest (in acting), undertakes active devotion through the
organs of action, is praiseworthy. Do thou perform the
actions which are necessary. Action is better than inactivity.
And if inactive, thou wilt not even acquire the necessary
sustenance for the body. This world entails the bonds of
action on any action but that which has worship for its
object." Do thou, O son of Kunti! being free from selfish

© This is explained by the following shloka: One should not imagine that by
merely sitting still and refusing to do anything. we are exempt from action and do
really not do anything, for the action of life still continues.

7 That is, by mere abstaining from action. ‘True renunciation, as explained in
Chapter V., consists in renouncing all interest and selfish motives in what we do.

® ‘The three qualities (sce note 41 in Ch. II.) are the causes of action, dlthough
sattwa and tamas are said to be inactive, since they are invariably mingled with
greater or less proportion of rajas. From this passage we gather that even the
commonest actions of life, the circulation of the blood and respiration, aro
attributed to the influence of the three qualities. For it must pe remembered that
they have not merely a moral influence on the heart of man, but a physical one on
all matter, being sprung from prakriti, or nature, the universal principle of matter.

® ‘The distinction must be remarked between the senses and the organs of action,
both called ‘senses’ /indriydni) in Hinda philosophy, and. the latter. merely
distinguished here by the preixing of the word darma. The sonsos are fre
hearing, sight, smell, ete. ; the organs of action /karmendriydni) also five, viz. the
hands, the feet, the mouth, the anus and the penis. ‘The action of these latter is
necessary to existence, and it is therefore ridiculous to imagine that one renounces
tation merely by staying the action of these organs. ‘The man who pondors with
his heart on sensual enjoyments, though he refrains from the actual physical
enjoyment of them, is a false pietist, as ‘He that looketh on a woman to lust after
her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.’ (St. Matthew, v. 28.)

10 It must be remembered that manaa, ‘the heart,’ is considered as da eleventh
or internal sense, to which the ten external ones convey their impressions, and
which in turn directs and rules them.

11 As has been alfeady remarked (Ch. IT. note 32), actions performed from
interested motives were considered as bad, however good in themselves, and
entailed the necessity of being recompensed, the good actions by a temporary
sojourn in Heaven, the bad by the same thing in Hel, both to be followed by



===== PAGE 162 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH ACTION. 23

interest, practise action which has that as its object. The
creator,!® when of old he had created mortals, together with
the rite of sacrifice, said to them, “ By means of this (sacrifice)
ye shall be propagated. It shall be to you a cow of plenty.'5
By means of it do ye support" the gods, and let these gods
support you. Supporting one another mutually, ye will ob-
tain the highest felicity. For being nourished by sacrifices,
the gods will give you the desired food. He who eats the
food given by them, without first offering some to them, is a
thief indeed.”!5 Good men, who eat what remains after the
sacrifice, are liberated from all their sins; but those bad men,
who cook for their own sakes only, eat sin.'6 Beings are
nourished by food. Food has its origin from rain. Rain is
the fruit of sacrifice. Sacrifice is performed by action.!7
Know that action proceeds from the Supreme Spirit. The
Supreme Being is co-existent with the indivisible. Therefore
this spirit, which is omnipresent, is always present in the
sacrifice.'® He who in this life does not cause this cycle, thus

regencration on earth. ‘These then are the bonds of action, entailed on all action
which isnot perfectly free from any interested or other motives, and merely
performed as a means of worship to the Supreme Being.

1 The Suprqme Spirit, in his character of the creative power personified as
BrahmG, instituted the sucrifice with fire as a treaty of mutual aid: between the
gods and man, and gave the Vedus as the text-book for the use of this rite. Man
‘was to be propagated by sacrifice, since, when appeased and nourished by it, the
deities sent the boons of sun, wind, and rain, by which his sustenance was
procured.

18 This, the Indian cornu-copire, is the cow of Indra, from which could be
milked whatever was desired.

14 The offering was believed to be actually brought away to the gods by their
messenger, the fire, and by them eaten.

18 Since his food is originally the gift of the gods, to which he, however, has
no right if hg does not sacrifice for it.

18 Compare Manu, iii. 118.

1 Compare Manu, iii. 76.

18 The Brahmanical scholiast has attempted to explain brahma to mean the
‘Vedas, whith it often does in later Sanskrit, but never in our poem. Schl
remarks that the distinction to be here made between the two words brahma and
akshara, both referring to the Supreme Being, is that the former alludés to him.
in his universal, omnipresent, character, existing throughout ‘matter, the latter to
his own individuality end, 0 to speak, personality. ‘This would be quite correct
if for latter wo substituted former, and for former, latter. This will be clearl
understood by a careful study of Chapter XV., and particularly the shlokas 1



===== PAGE 163 / 300 =====

24 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRD.

already revolved, to continue revolving,'® lives to no purpose,
a life of sin, O son of Prith&! indulging his senses. But the
man who only takes delight in himself, and is satisfied with
himself, and is content in himself alone, has no selfish interest
in action.” He has no interest in what is done or what is not
done in this world. Nor is there among all things which
exist any object of use to him. Therefore do thou perform
the work which should be done,” without interest. For a
man who performs his duty without interest obtains the
highest (region).* For by actions Janaka and others*
arrived at perfection. Even if thou only considerest the good
of mankind, thou shouldst perform actions.** Whatever the
most excellent practise, other men practise likewise. The
world follows whatever example they set. I (for instance),
O son of Pyithé! have nothing which I am obliged to do
throughout the three worlds, nor does there remain un-
obtained by me anything which I might obtain,® and yet I

and 17. Three categories of spirit are there marked out, ‘The lowest is the soul
of man called Asiura, divisible; the next is akshara, indivisible, explained by the
word kifastha, ‘ pervading all things;’ the third is the Supreme Being in his own
individual personality, there called paramdtmd, and corresponding to brakma here.
These shades of meaning are the more difficult to traco, us they are found in no
other work than that before us. :

18 The revolving cycle in which this life moves has been just explained. Action

forms sacrifice ; sacrifice brings rain, ete. ; rain, food ; anti food supports man,

fe therefore who does not act at all stops the whole order of life, and though he
lives, lives sensually only, not religiously,

% Te who does not seek for any enjoyment from without, but is all in all to
himsclt, performs actions as a duty, and hot with any selfish or interested motive.

3 Generally speaking all duties of religion, but here more particularly the
peculiar offices of caste which Krishna is exhorting Arjuna not to neglect.

22 The being of the Supreme Spirit.

% Janaka and other royal Rishis, or saints, not being Munis or devotees
by profession, eould yet altain to perfection by the upright and wise performance
of their duty. : i

3% He now commences a new line of argument, appealing to Arjuna’s philan-
thropical feelings, and attempting to show that killing his focs is a boon to
mankind generaily, if not to them in particular. The force of example is great,
and one who, like Arjuna, filled a lofty and responsible position, shoutd carry out
the duties of his caste, that others may profit by his example.

2 Krishna, as idogtified with the Supremo Spirit, had of course no emancipation
to work out, as he hdd adopted a material body, which, by his own power,
he could at sny moment shake off nor eould he who possessed all things have any
Interest in a petty earth, Sill, as he was born inthe Kahatria east, he was now
about to

its duties by fighting, as an example to others.


===== PAGE 164 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH ACTION. 25

am constantly in action. For if I were not always to con-
tinue indefatigable in activity—(mankind follow in my steps
in everything, son of Prith4)—these people would perish * if
I were not to do actions. And I should be the author of con-
fusion of the castes,’ and should destroy these mortals. As
the unwise act, being self-interested in acting, so should
the wise act, not being interested, from the wish to do good
to mankind. And they should not allow a difference of
opinions to spring up in the ignorant, who act with motives
of self-interest.* The wise man, acting with devotion, should
fulfil all actions (which are prescribed to him). Actions are
always effected solely and entirely by the qualities of
nature.» The man whose mind is befooled by ignorance
thinks, “I am the doer of them.” But he, O strong-armed.
one! who knows the truth of the difference between the
qualities and actions, believing that they revolve in the
qualities, has no selfish interest (in acting).* Those who are

26 Would, by committing sin in the neglect of their duty, go to Naraka, ete.

7 Since the purity of the caste was one of its highest qualities. We are struck
in many passages of our poem by the ingenuity which our author displays in
introdueing, in both Arjuna's and Krishna's arguments, the strong necessity for
keeping the distinction of caste ever unbroken. It is, as wo have said elsewhere,
a proof that at ghe period of the composition of our poem, some attempt had been
made by the Kshatriyas to break through these well-drawn bounds, and on the
one hand to assume the privileges of the Brahmans, on the other to raise the
wealthy Vaishyas to their own level.

28 Should not provoke scctarianism in the lower classes by public schisms in the
higher ones. We here agnin seg the true spirit of Brélimanism peering through
the ethics of the philosopher, ‘The learned and the powerful, the Brahman and
the Kshatriya, wero allowed the liberty of thought, as long as the Vaishya and the
Shadra, the bulk of the populace, were kept in strict subservience to the
established religion by the foree of exxmple. Once liberty of thought—once
discord, or even discussion allowed to the lower castes—and the power of the
priesthood yould have tottered, as it did in the days of Buddha,

29 The pres, part. pass. has here the force of continuance,

% The three qualities (guna) which belong to and affect all matter. See
Chapter II. notes 41, 42.

31 ‘The Sbscurity of this passage has not beon dispersed by either scholiasts or
translators. It must be borne in mind that the three qualities which influence
matter are the good and inactive, the bad and active, and the bad and inactive.
‘These qualities never act alone, but always in unison, though*often in such unequal
proportions that one or other seems to stand alono without the other two. ‘This
‘united action is treated of in Ch. XIV. All action is caused by the influence of
these qualities on matter, and the spiritually-wise, knowing that they thus revolve



===== PAGE 165 / 300 =====

26 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRD.

bewildered by the natural qualities are interested in the
actions of the qualities. He who understands the whole
universe, should not cause these people, slow and ignorant
of the universe, to relax from their duty. Do thou fight,
reposing all thy actions on me, by means of meditation on the
Adhyétmé,® free from hopes and from selfishness, and having
put away this morbidness, Those men who ever follow this
my doctrine, full of faith, and not reviling it,4 are finally
emancipated, even by actions.» But those who, reviling this
(doctrine), do not observe my decrees, are bewildered by all
their knowledge, and perish, being without reason. Even the
wise man inclines towards that which agrees with his own
nature. All follow their own nature. What can coercion
effect ? Love or hate exist towards the object of each sense.
One should not fall into the power of these two passions, for
they are one’s adversaries. It is better to do one’s own duty,
even though it be devoid of excellence, than to perform
another’s duty well.% Death is better in the performance of
one’s own duty. Another's duty is productive of danger.’

within one another in constant unison, ascribe each action to them. Thus they
know that when desire springs up in the heart, the second quulity predominates ;
when aversion to religious duties, the third; and when inclinatiop to those same
duties, the first, etc. But the ignorant man, not perceiving this action of the
guatties, believes himself to be the agent and motive of every action, good or bad,

ing thus deluded by the influence of the qualities, he attaches himself to each
action of life, and looks forward to its result. The law is then his only check
against crime, and the Brahman, and those learned in the truth, should therefore
be careful not to break through it by setting a bad example.

See Chapter VIII. note 1.

33 Namely, Yoga, which Krishna calls his own, partly because he is expounding
it to Arjuna, and partly because he is considered the Tord of devotion (yogeshware),
and identified by this school with the Supreme Spirit.

34 Those who reviled his doctrine were chiefly the Shaivyas, wha identified
Shiva—not Vrishni or Krishna—with the Supreme Being, and were always at war
with the followers of the latter, and also the followers of the Mimansa and
Vedénta systems, who attacked all schools which did not employ the Vedas as
their authority. .

% In opposition to Kapila and his disciples, who maintained that spiritual
knowledge alone was the means of salvation. .

% This arddha-shloke (half-couplet) recurs in Ch. XVIII. 47, where the disputed
meaning of viguna is explained by the context, For in shi. 48 of that Chapter,
he adds: ‘One should not reject the duty to which one is born, even if it be
associated with error ; for all human undertakings are involved in error, as fie is



===== PAGE 166 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH ACTION. 27

ARJUNA SPOKE.

«Instigated, then, by what, does this man incur sin even
against his will, O descendant of Vrishni, impelled, as it were,
by force ?”

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘It is desire (which instigates him). It is passion, sprung
from the quality of badness,” voracious, all sinful. Know
that it is hostile (to man) in this world. As fire is sur-
rounded by smoke, and a mirror by rust, as the fetus is
involved in the womb, so is this universe surrounded by this
(passion). Knowledge is surrounded by this, the constant
enemy of the wise man,—a fire, which assumes any form it
will, O son of Kunti! and is insatiable. Its empire is said to
be the senses, the heart, and the intellect. By means of
these, it surrounds knowledge, and bewilders the soul.
Therefore do thou, O best of Bharatas! in the first place,
restraining thy senses, cast off this sinful impetus, which
devours spiritual knowledge and spiritual discernment.”

in smoke? Arjuna complains that his duty as a Kshatriya is bad and obnoxious,
since it requires him to slay his own relations, and he would prefer the duty of a
Brahma, not to fight, even though attacked (Chapter I. 35). Krishna now
replies that the duty of onc’s own caste, however bad, is better than that of
another caste, dle insists on the performance by each caste of its own special
calling, and not of another's. It is another apparent proof of the efforts which
were being made at this period by the Kshatriyas to usurp the office, if not
the power of the Brahmans. See uote 27.

37 Rajas, the second of the three gunas.

3 Yathddarsha must be resolved into yathd + ddarsha. Langlois (Journal
Abiatiqus, vol. iv, 1824, p. 236) did not discover this eras ‘and would have
translated darsha by ‘face,’ and mala the ‘dirt’ that covers it. | Schlegel’s idea is
certainly preferable—ddarsha is a mirror of some burnished metal, and mala the
rust that forms upon it. ide Schleg tempered reply to Langlois’ criticism
in the Journal Asiatigue, vol. ix. 1825, p. 3, ete.

It must be remembered that the three qualities cannot influence spirit
directly, their dominion being limited to matter, whether in its developed /oyakta)
or its undeveloped form /avyakta, prakriti, etc.). The heart /manas) and the
mind (buddhi/ are considered parts of developed matter, just as much as the
senses ; an@ through them is matter connected with spirit, the body with the soul.
‘Thus all impressions from without aro received by the senses, and immediately
transmitted to the heart. The heart transmits them to the intellect, and this
again to the soul itself. If then the heart be not under the Strict keeping of the
soul, it is bewildered by passions, and transmits a fevered and wrong impression of
external objects to the soul itself, which is then also bewildered.

For explanations of these terms see Ch. VII. note 2.



===== PAGE 167 / 300 =====

28 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRD.

They say that the senses are great. The heart is greater
than the senses. But intellect is greater than the heart, and
that which is greater than intellect is this passion. Knowing
that it is thus greater than the mind, strengthening thyself
by thyself, do thou, O great-armed one! slay this foe," which
assumes any form it will, and is intractable.’
Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Third Chapter,
by name
‘DEVOTION THROUGH ACTION.’

‘ That this alludes to the passion /dma/, and not to the human enemy before
them, ig shown by the repetition of the epithet kdma-riupa, used above, in
shloka 39,


===== PAGE 168 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE FOURTH.

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘I delivered this imperishable doctrine of Yoga to Vivaswat.
Vivaswat declared it to Manu, Manu told it to Ikshwéku.
Thus the Réjarshis learnt it, handed down from one to
another.! During a considerable period of time, this doctrine
has been lost in the world, O harasser of thy foes. I have
now explained to thee this same ancient doctrine, (as I con-
sidered) that thou wert both my worshipper and my friend.
For this mystery is very important.’

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘Thy birth was posterior, that of Vivaswat anterior.? How
shall I comprehend this (that thou sayest), “I was the first
to declare it’’?”

1 This is a slight historical notice, destined to introduce the detailed description
of the Yoga-system, and arrogating for it the highest possible ongin, by attribut-
ing it to Vishnu, before his incarnation as Krishna, Vivaswat is the sun. Manu,
his son, commonly called Vaivaswata Manu, is the last of the seven Manus, who
have as yet existed, presides over the present Manwantara (see Indez:), and is the
resumed author of the code of religious law which bears his name.’ Tkshwaku,
is aon, was the fiat King of the eo-called solar dynasty, a mixture of saint and
monarch, like David, and therefore called Rajarshi, or Royal Saint. ‘Through
him, says Krighna, the rest of tho solar dynusty, the Rijarshis, received and
practised this doctrine, It was then lost for some time to the world, until revived
in the mouth of Krishna, A like assumption of divine authority is made by most
authors for their doctrines; but the present is curious, not only as referring the
origin of tho system to Vishno, rather than to Brahma, but as giving to the
Kehatriya caste, the Réjarshis, the honour of its transmission, a sop offered to the
offended lion by the wary Brihman. How much more simple and honest is the
account in the Sinkhya-kérika (shl. 69, 70, 71), which secks a no more mystic
origin for the Sankhya system than the mind of its great discoverer, Kapila!

? Axjuna, ignorant that in using the pronoun of the ffrst person, Krishna
refers to his identity with Vishnu, not to his incarnation as Krighna, docs not
understand how Krishna could exist before Vivaswat. He replies by explaining
the transmigrations of the soul.



===== PAGE 169 / 300 =====

30 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THF FOURTH.

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

*I and thou, O Arjuna! have passed through many trans-
migrations. I know all these. Thou dost not know them,
O harasser of thy foes! Even though I am unborn, of
changeless essence, and the lord also of all which exist, yet,
in presiding over nature (prakriti), which is mine, I am born
by my own mystic power (mdyd).3 For whenever‘ there is
a relaxation of duty, O son of Bharata! and an increase of
impiety, I then reproduce myself® for the protection of the
good, and the destruction of evil-doers. I am produced in
every age® for the purpose of establishing duty. He who
thus truly comprehends my divine birth and action, does not
undergo regeneration when he quits the body, but comes to
me,’ Arjuna! Many, being free from love, fear and anger,
devoted to me, and taking refuge in me, purified by the
ascetic fire® of knowledge, enter my being. In whatever

3 Speaking of himsclf as the Supreme Being, he calls nature (prakyiti) his
own. M4yé is the mystic power of the Supreme Being, by which he creatos
matter, which has no real existence, since real existence is eternal ; and only spirit
is eternal, and really exists. To man, however, matter appears to have a real
existence, and hence the use of May, /it. ‘magic,’ to express the creative power.

« The repetition of yadd expresses the repetition of its meaning.

5 For an account of Vighnu’s avatdras, see Index, under the name Vishnu,

© Not once merely in every age. The avaddras or incarnations of Vishnu are
ten in number, yugas or ages in Which they occur only four. Thy are the Satya,
Treta, Dw&para, and Kali, Yugas, of different lengths in duration, and_ making
with the Sandhyis and Sandliyantas, the periods at the beginning and end o
each, altogether 5,440,000 years. (See Chapter VIII. note 19.) The first four
avathras took place in the Satya-yuge, the next three in the ‘Tret4, the eighth in
the Dwépara, the last two in the present or Kali-yuga,

1 Knowledge of the Supreme Being is then a means of emancipation. But
works are equally so, when properly undertaken. (Chapter III. 19, 20.) There-
fore according to the Yoga school, the paths towards final emancipation are two,
Kepila arrogates the same power for knowledge of his own system, but Patanjali,
and our poet, being Theists, make knowledge of the Supreme Spirit the first
condition of spiritual knowledge.

® Tapas is the name given to ascetic exercises generally ; they consist chiefly in
self-denial, fasting, sclf-castigation, restraint of the senses, and contemplation,
Tap, the root from which it is derived, originally signifies, ‘to heat, burn,’ ete.,
and since, to Hindd ideas, nothing. better represents pain than heat, it has
reoeived the meaning of ‘torture.’ ‘This was applied to the practice of asceticism,
and the word is aptly used in this place, as it at once conveys the meaning
of ascetic exercise, and' of heat which purifies. The scholiast and Galanos have
wrongly taken the compound jndna-tapas for a diandwa, or aggrogative ; but, as
Lassen’ remarks, it would then require the’ sign of the dual number (seo Wilson's
Sanskrit Grammar, p. 355). It is, however, a Te¢purupha compound, or one in



===== PAGE 170 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE. 31

manner these men approach me, just in the same manner do
I recompense them. Mankind turn towards my path in
every manner, O son of Prith&!® Those who desire success
for their actions sacrifice in this world to the deities; and,
forsooth, in this human world success soon arises, produced by
their actions.!° The institution of the four castes was created
by me, according to the distribution of the natural qualities
and actions." Know that I even am the creator of (this
institution), although in reality not its creator,!? and in-
corruptible. My actions do not follow me, nor have I any
interest in the fruits of my actions. He who comprehends me
to be thus is not bound by the bonds of actions.!? Those of

which tho former component is, governed by the later, tough in what cas it
should stand, is dependent on the senso. We should remember that he is now
treating of judna-yoga, or devotion by means of spiritual knowledge, as contrasted
with karma-yoga, or devotion by means of works, of which he treated in the last
Chapter: and this passage may be compared with what is said farther on in
shloka 19. -

® Mankind worship divers gods with divers objects, but though they know it
not, it is really the Supreme Being that they worship under these different aspects,
But as it dopends on a man's heart which god he worships, 1, the Supreme Spirit,
rewurd them according to their worship. If the object of their wishes be the
cnjoyment of heaven, they sacrifice to Indra and his subject deities, and I recom=
erse them by a sojourn in Indma-loka his heaven, proportionate in duration to
the fervency of their devotion. If, on the other hand, their religion be the result
of base fear, they gacrifice to the Rakshasas, ctc., and to them I send them after
death. But if, recognizing my kind nature, they worship me in my supreme
spiritual character, with true devotion, they are then finally emancipated, and
enter my being.

\ This is an exomplification of the proceding shloka, Each of the deities
of, mythology is patron of aon one era, or donor of rome peculiar blesing, and
this 1 grant, if ther worship be sincere and devout. The particle Ai is here
simply conjunctive. Wilkins has rendered the second arddha-shloka as if kshipra
wore an adjective.

11 ‘The qualities were supposed to be distributed in difforent proportions among
the four castes. ‘The Bralimans had a preponderance of sattwa. ‘I'he Kshatriyas
of sata and gajae. The Vaishyas of rats and tence, and the Shidras of fanaa
alone. ‘The action or office of tho first caste was knowledgo, prayer, instruction
and self-restraint; of the second, sovereignty and protection of the people, by
peace and warfare; of tho Vaishyas, commerce and agriculture; of the Shadras,
servitude. 4

12 Referring to the belief that the Brahma was tho institutor of caste. But
sinee Brahma was only tho Supreme Spirit in his personified character of creator
of all things, he is right in calling himsolf its institutor. Walkfns and St. Hilaire
give to the word akarédram (on what authority I know not) a passive signification,

13 Another assertion that jndna-yoga, a right comprehension of Divine truth, is
a means of final emancipation, .

w


===== PAGE 171 / 300 =====

32 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FOURTH.

old time,' knowing it to be thus,'> performed actions in the
hope of final emancipation. Do thou therefore do an action '*
which was formerly done by the ancients. Even sages’ have
‘een troubled as to “ what is action and what inaction.” Such
action I will explain to thee, by the knowledge of which thou
wilt be liberated from evil.'§ The (natures)? of action,
forbidden action, and inaction, must be well learnt. The path
of action is obscure. He who discovers inaction in action,
and action in inaction, is wise among mortals.” He is
devoted, and performs all his duty. The wise say that the
man whose undertakings are all free from plans of ambition,
performs actions which are consumed in the fire of know-
ledge,* and call him learned. He who abandons all interest
in the fruit of his actions, is always contented and indepen-
dent. Even though occupied in action, he does not really

¥ Viz, : Janaka and the Rajarshis, of whom he has already spoken.

4 Eeam always refers to what has preceded, but as, if it referred to shloka 14)
it would be no reason for their thus acting, 1 am inclined to think it must be
referred to the nature of caste, mentioned in shloka 13, and that shloka 14 must
be taken parenthetically, as explanatory of the words akartdram and avyayamn, if
indeed it be not an interpolation of ‘later date. It was the knowledge that
the castes were divided according to their offices and duties (karma), and that
these were instituted by the Supreme Being, that induced the devotees of old time
to cling closely to the limits assigned to their caste, .

18 War, the duty of the Kshatriyas.

17 Lit., ¢ poets, songsters,’ and generally ‘learned men,’ Not that the poets of
India, unlike those of any other nation, Were necessurily wise and learned ; but
rather that, in the early rustic ages of the Aryan race, when the voice of man was
the only organ of literature, the wise and learned breathed their knowledge
in song.

28 The knowledge of action then is a part of that spiritual knowledge which
aids the escape from the ovil of regeneration, by final emancipation,

19 We follow Schlegel in his suggestion of ¢attwa, as the word on which these
three genitives must be understood to depend.

2 He who comprehends the real nature of action knows that it is not himself
who acts, but the natural qualities which accomplish their office; and again, when
he is apparently inactive, the vital action still proceeds.

21 His actions, whatever they may be, are, in effect, no actions, sinco his know-
ledge teaches him their real causes, and thus destroys his responsibility for them.

% Lit,, ‘requires no refuge, no shelter.’ He who acts from interested motives,
seeks, whenever lw commits it, a refuge from the consequences of his crime; but
the man who acts with devotion may even commit a bad deed without fear of its
Tesults, since he does so without any intention, simply by nocessity, or as a duty.
A soldier wha fires at the command of his superior officer cannot be said to commit
murder. ‘This is explained in the next shloka,



===== PAGE 172 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE. 33,

do anything. He who, without hopes (of reward), restrains
his own thoughts, abandons all that he possesses, and renders
his actions merely corporeal, does not incur sin. Contented
with what he receives fortuitously, superior to the influence
of opposites,®? without envy, the same in success and failure,
even though he acts, he is not bound by the bonds of action.
The entire action of a man who is free from self-interest and
devoted,** whose thoughts are directed by spiritual know-
ledge, and who acts for the sake of sacrifice,” is (asit were)
dissolved away. The Supreme Spirit is the offering. The
Supreme Spirit is the sacrificial butter.%* The Supreme Spirit
is in the (sacrificial) fire. By the Supreme Spirit is the
offering (really) made. Therefore only the Supreme Spirit
is attained by one who meditates on the Supreme Spirit in
(performing) his actions.” Some devotees attend to the
sacrifice of the deities only; others offer sacrifice by the
action of worship only in the fire of the Supreme Being.
Some sacrifice the sense of hearing, and the other (senses), in

23 Such as heat and cold, pain and pleasure, ete.

2% T+have here ventured to make a conjecture, which will be defended at length
in my edition of the text, viz. yuktasya for muktasya, which is found in the two
editions, and & believe in most, if not all, of the MSS, When the sense is
80 materially improved by so slight a change as that of y for m, I do not hesitate
to adopt it,

2% That is, ‘instigated only by the spirit of devotion.’ The shlokas 25-29
explain this species of sacrifice.

2 Gheo, or clarified butter, is butter which has been boiled gently and allowed
to cool. It is poured upon the sacrificial fire.

21 Since the Supreme Spirit exists in every action and every thing, the man
who recognizes him in every thing, and has him as his sole object in his
every action, attains to him.

bis Schlogel has well explained the meaning of theso shlokas 25-29, and bids us
compare Manu iv. 22-24. They uppear to be explanatory of what is said in
shloka 23, of acting for the sake of sucrifice; and the different means are shown
wy which sacrifice may be offered to the Supreme Being by a real devotee (yogin).

‘c have first the common mode ordained by the established religion—sacrifices to
the deiti, such as Indra, Varuna, Agni, etc. ; not, however, undertaken from
motives of interest, as explained in shloka 12, but from the belief that the
Supreme Being oxists in those deities, as in everything else. In the next arddha-
shloka, on the contrary, are mentioned those who, abandenihg the established rite,
perform a mental sacrifice, as it were, in which those rites are themselves the
offering which is consumed in the devotion to the Supreme Spirit, who thus

mes the sacrificial fire, :


===== PAGE 173 / 300 =====

34 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FOURTH.

the fires of restraint ;® some offer objects of sense, such as
sound, in the fires of the senses; and others sacrifice all
actions of the senses and of vitality in the fire of devotion
through self-restraint, which is kindled by spiritual know-
ledges! Others also sacrifice by their wealth,” or by morti-
fication, by devotion, by silent study, and spiritual know-
ledge, being subdued in their passions, and faithful to their
vows. Some also sacrifice inspiration of breath in expiration,
and expiration in inspiration, by blocking up the channels
of inspiration and expiration, desirous of retaining their
breath. Others, by abstaining from food, sacrifice life in
their life All of these indeed, being versed in sacrifice,
have their sins destroyed by these sacrifices. Those who eat

29 Those who retire from the world into the jungle, where their senses, such as
hearing, sight, ctc., will not be allured by the external objects of this world. This
restraint /sanyama)—this practice of ascetic monachism—this retirement from the
world—is, as it were, tho sacrificial firc which destroys those senses, of the
enjoyment of which they deprive themselves, as the ordinary sacrificer docs of the
enjoyment of the sheep or the ox which he offers. °

3 ‘Those, on the other hand, who, remaining in the world, allow the objects of
sense, such as pleasant sound (c.g. music), pleasant sights (e.g. female beauty, etc.),
to surround and attack them, but by a complete mastery over their sonses, which
they ascail, destroy their influence over their hearts. Here the objects, of the
enjoyment of which they deprive themselves, are in the same position as the
viotim ; and the senses, in which they are absorbed, as the sacriticthl fire.

% ‘Those who, following the principles of jndna-yoga, and devoted to the
research of the Divine truth, pass their lives in the severest austerities of asceticisea
in order to obtain it, They sit in contomplation, as immoveable as possible,
refraining from food during certain gradually increasing intervals, and even
holding their breath for long periods. ‘heir senses and breath, from the action
of which they refrain, are thus likened to the victim, their devotion and self-
restraint to the sacrificial fire,

3 By giving away all that they possess, and imposing poverty on themselves.

35 As we are told in Chapter IV. 27, this inspiration and expiration are those
which pass through the nostrils, ‘This sacrifice is usually called princydma, and
is accomplished in the following manner :—The followers of the Vedas close the
right nostril with the thumb and inhale their breath through the left. ‘They then
close both nostrils, and finally open the right for oxbalation. The followers of the
Tantras close the loft nostril first, and also exhale through it. Dering this
exercise, however performed, the devotee should recite mentally tho names and
attributes of the Supreme Being.

% When prina i employed in the plural
signification ‘of ‘life.’ ‘This shloka therefore
abstinence, the devotee—while yet alive—becomes
thus, even during life, offers his life as a sacrifice.

has always tho more general
mply means, that by excesire
Imost as lifeless as if dead, and


===== PAGE 174 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE. 35

of the ambrosia ® left from a sacrifice pass into the eternal
Supreme Spirit. This world is not for the neglecter of
sacrifice. How should the other be s0,3° O best of Kurus P?
Sacrifices of so many kinds (as the above) are performed in
the presence of the Supreme Spirit. Know that all these
spring from action. Knowing this, thou wilt be (finally)
emancipated. The sacrifice of spiritual knowledge is better
than a material sacrifice, O harasser of thy foes! Every action,
without exception, is comprehended in spiritual knowledge, O
son of Prithé! Acquire this (knowledge) by doing honour, by
inquiry, and by:service.*® Those gifted with this knowledge,
who perceive the truth of things, will teach thee this know-
ledge. Knowing which, thou wilt not, O son of Pandu! thus
again incur an error. By this knowledge thou wilt recognize
all things whatsoever in thyself, and then in me. If thou
wert even the most sinful of all sinners, thou wouldest cross
over all sin in the bark of spiritual knowledge. As fire,

3 As has been already said (Ch. ITT. 12), the man who eats without sacrificing
—isa thief; but he who eats what remains, after he has sacrificed, eats ambrosia,
that is, the bread of immortality (anita), since it ensures for him eternal life. It
does not here, however, simply refcr to the actual food remaining after the offering,
but to that state of Ife, which a devotee enjoys, after the performance of the
divers sacrifices already mentioned.”

% Tho man yho makes no sacrifice either to the deities or the Supreme Being
njoys neither this world nor eternal life; for if not propitinted by saerifiee, the
former will not grant him his desires, nor will the latter admit him into his being.

31 The word kurn—hore and clsewhere —when alluding to Arjuna, must be
taken in the more general sense which embraces all the descendants of Kuru, both
Pandavas and Dhirtarshtras, though more commonly confined to the latter.

3 This is simply a recapitulation of what has preceded. But it has been
otherwise understood by the translators, Schlegel has ‘ propagata et numinis ore,’
as if the roading were mukhdt ; Wilkins, ‘manifested in the mouth of God,’ givin,
quite a new meaning to vitatd; Galanos, ‘ordained by the Vedas themselves,
Aecopting, ax elsewhere, the Bribmanical interpretation of the word brahma.
8t. Hilaire gone has ‘répandus devant la divinité’ In Manu iii. 28, the words
vitate yajne arc used in the sense of performing a sacrifice; and in Nala i. 64, this
verb, used in the same sense, is explained by the Scholiast by akarot, ‘performed.’
Again, the common use of the word mukhe is that of a post-position governing the
genitive cage, with the meaning of ‘in the presence, before,’ ete. ; and the present
translation would thus seem to be more grammatical and simpler than any other.

3 To those philosophers who possess this knowledge.

© Thou wilt perceive the connection botweon all beings ari thyself and me, the
Supreme Spirit, since all souls are emanations from me.

4 Not implying that the devotes may sin ad Zibitum, but that spiritual know-
ledge, which in shicka 88 is called the best purifier, purges him of his former sin.
however black,



===== PAGE 175 / 300 =====

36 BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE FOURTH.

when kindled, reduces fuel to ashes, Arjuna, so does the fire
of knowledge burn to ashes all actions. For there is no
purifier in the world like knowledge. A man who is per-
fected in devotion finds it spontaneously in himself in the
progress of time.“? He who possesses faith acquires spiritual
knowledge, if intent on it, and restraining his senses. Having
acquired spiritual knowledge, he soon attains to supreme
tranquillity.* He who ignores the truth, and is devoid of
faith, and of doubtful mind, perishes. The man of doubtful
mind enjoys neither this world nor the other, nor final
beatitude,"® No actions bind the man who frusts his actions
to devotion, who has dispersed doubt by knowledge, and is
self-possessed, O despiscr of wealth! Therefore sever this
doubt which exists in thy heart, and springs from ignorance,
with thy sword of knowledge ;’ turn to devotion, and arise,
son of Bharata!’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Fourth Chapter,
by name

‘DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL KNOWLEDGE.’

# Active devotion and contemplation arc the means by which spiritual know.
ledge is acquired, even without instruction. .

© Faith is the absence of all doubt and scepticism, confidence in the revelation
of religion and unmurmuring performance of its ordinances. ‘This is another
argument against Arjuna’s refusal to fight, since it arose from doubts as to his duty
as a Kshatriya,

“ Final emancipation, freedom from the toils and pains of all material existence.

* Viz,, the heaven of Indra and the deities, ete.

“ Since from doubt about his duty, he neglects it, and is punished in Naraka,

“ Tt will be seon that, at the end of every Chaptor, wherever it is possible,
Krishna exhorts Arjuna to arise and fight, whether it be again the actual
nemy before him, or against some cvil that threatens him, Seo Chapter III.

oka 43, «


===== PAGE 176 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE FIFTH.

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘Thou praisest, Krishna! the renunciation of works,! and
on the other hand devotion (through them)? Declare to me
with precision that one only which is the better of these two.’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Renunciation of and devotion through works are both
means of final emancipation.’ But of these two, devotion
through works is more highly esteemed than renunciation of
them. He who neither hates nor loves is to be considered a
constant renouncer of actions. For he who is free from the
influence of opposites, O strong-armed one! is liberated from
the bonds of action without any trouble. Boys, but not wise
men, speak of the S4nkhya (rational) and Yoga (devotional)
doctrines‘ as different. For ‘he who is devoted to one (of
these) only, experiences at the same time the fruits of both.>

1 Having in the last Chapter parenthetically explained the nature of spiritual
knowledge, and established the fact that devotion by means of such knowledge was
a part of the Yoga system, he now returns to the explanation of action as a means
of salvation. In this Chapter he will show that the Sankhya and Yoga doctrines,
‘ag regards action, arc in reality the same, although the watchword of the former is
renunciation of all action and reliance on knowledge only, and that of the latter
Practice of action with devotion. This he proves by showing that the very
Practice held up by Yoga comprises, in fact, proper renunciation, since this is not
really entire renunciation of action itself, but of all worldly interest in acting.

2 The genitive armdndm is dependent on yogam, as well as on sanydsam, and
the two words are together equivalent to the compound karma-yoga, Compare,
moreover, Chapter VV. 27.

3 We will not trouble the reader with a repetition of the refined discussion on
the word nihshreyas, but rofer him to Cheézy’s critique (Journal des Savans,
1826, p, 42), and Schlegel’s note on this passage, .

Compare Chapter IT. 39.

® Viz, final emancipation,


===== PAGE 177 / 300 =====

88 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIFTH.

That place® which is gained by the followers of the Sankhya
is also attained by those of the Yoga system. He who sees
that the Sankhya and Yoga are one, sees indeed.?' But re-
nunciation of actions is difficult to obtain without devotion.
The anchorite who practises devotion approaches the Suprethe
Spirit in no long time. The practiser of devotion, whose
spirit is purified, who has subdued himself and vanquished his
senses, whose soul participates in the souls of all creatures,® is
not polluted even by action. The devotee who knows the
Divine truth should think, “I am doing nothing” ® whenever
he looks, hears, touches, smells, eats,° walks,” sleeps,!? or
breathes ;!5 even when he speaks,!* lets go or takes,’ opens or
shuts his eyes, believing that the senses move (by natural
impulse)!® towards the objects of the senses. He who, in
acting, offers his actions to the Supreme Spirit,” and puts
aside self-interest, is not polluted by sin, even as a lotus leaf
is not so by water.'8 Devotees perform actions by their
bodies, hearts, or intellects, merely through the medium of
the senses, putting away self-interest, and for the sake of
purification.!° The man who is devoted, and regardless of

© The being of the Supreme Spirit,

1 Pashyati is here used emphatically, seeing with spiritual sight.

® Who considers all beings to be the same as himself, and feels towards them
accordingly.

® But the quality of action /rajas) working within me, causes these senses and
organs to act.

10 That is, when the five senses of perception are in action,

1 The action of the feet considered as one of the five organs of action.

1 Cessation of the action of the senses,

18 Vital action,

16 The action of the mouth, as another of the five organs of action.

18 The same, of the hands. .

18 By the quality of action /rajas).

17 Performs every action for the simple purpose of worship to the Supreme Being.

18 Most textures are damaged, or at least changed, by constantly remaining in
water ; but the leaf of the lotus is by nature fortified against the external influence
of the liquid. In like manner the heart of the devotee is prepared against tho
effect of sin—which ronstantly attacks him from without—by the disinterestedness
of his actio .

1 By their bodies, for bodily purification, such as religious offices ; by the heart,
for the purification of the desires; and by the mind, for that of the thoughts.



===== PAGE 178 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF THE RENUNCIATION, OF ACTIONS. 389

the reward of his actions, obtains steady tranquillity. He
who is not devoted, and is intent on the reward, by the
impulse of passion, is bound (with the bonds of action). The
self-restrained, renouncing all actions with his heart, can,
without difficulty, rest (tranquil) within a city with nine
gates,” neither acting himself nor causing (others) to act.”
The lord of the world creates neither the faculty of acting nor
actions, nor yet the desire for the fruits of actions. But each
man’s own nature produces them.* The Lord receives no
one’s vice or virtue. Knowledge is surrounded by ignorance.**
Therefore creatures err. But the knowledge of those in
whose souls that ignorance is destroyed by knowledge, lights
up that supreme one, like the sun.” Those whose thoughts
are on that spirit, whose souls are in it, who exist in it, and
are intent on it, their sins being put away by knowledge,
attain to that place whence there is no return.® The wise

20 Lit,, ‘sit,'—but referring to the tranquillity of the soul.

21 Which is the body, whose apertures are nine, viz. two eyes, two ears, two
nostrils, the mouth, the anus, and the membrum genitale.

22 Speaking, of courso, of the soul, sinco, though the senses and organs act and
even go through the performance of their duty, etc., it is the natural quality of
impulse /rajas) which prompts the action, while the mind of tho individual, which
as we know, is considered by Hinds philosophers as quite distinct from the soul,
directs them,

% ‘Tho Supitme Being has created, and will again receive into himself, the
universe and the souls which people it; but once life infused into the great machine
—onee nature, the material essence, set in motion—and, as the Hinda philosopher
belioves, it continues, like a clock, to go of itself. Certain qualities have
assigned to nature, and it is by these that good and evil are produced in the world,
according to the predominance of one or other of the three qualities in the dispo-
tition of men. Hence man's diversity of disposition and character, and tho
or bad actions which he commits. ‘This siwab/iva, ‘ disposition, cbaracter, bent,’
would scem to be the only substitute in Hindi philosophy for our idea of free-will;
but when we remomber that real sin consisted not so much in the crimes to which
this disposition impelled each being, as in that blind worldliness which failod to
detect its existence, and so subdue it accordingly, and when we compare it to the
of evil which we believe to be over at work within us, we cannot accuse this
¢ of depriving mankind entirely of free-will and independence. ‘The crime
of the murderer is not so much in tho commission of the actual deed, when he has
once allowed the temptation to take hold of him, as in not before detocting and
combating the temptation itself.

4% Tgnorance of the working of the swabhdva within thom,

3 Discloses to them the truo nature of the Supreme Spirit, as the sun discloses
the earth.

% ‘Tho being of the Supreme Spitit—since the eoul always eventually returned
to carth, even from the highest of other heavens.



===== PAGE 179 / 300 =====

40 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIFTH.

regard a Bréhman gifted with knowledge and modesty, a
cow, an elephant, and even a dog and a Shwapéka,® as the
same. Even in this life, those whose heart persists in equa-
bility, surmount the tendencies of their natures. For the
Supreme Being is free from sin and equal-minded. Therefore
they partake of the nature of the Supreme Being. One
should not be overjoyed when one obtains what one loses, nor,
grieve when one meets with what one desires not, but should
be of unwandering thoughts, not deluded (by the world),
seeking to know the Supreme Being, remaining within the
Supreme Being. He whose soul is not attached to the contact
of external objects, and who ® finds pleasure within himself,
whose soul is united, by means of devotion, to the Supreme
Being, enjoys imperishable happiness. For those enjoyments
which arise from external contacts are also the wombs of
pain,” since they have a beginning and an end, O son of
Kunti! The wise man does not take pleasure in them. He
who can resist, even in this life, the impulse arising from
desire and anger, before the liberation of the soul from the

27 As a good Brahman was considered the best specimen of a mortal so the
Shwapdka was the worst. Again, the cow was the most venerated among animals,
the dog the least so, and the elephant a respectable medium. «

28 This is tho name of the most abject and outcast class of Hinds society. Born
of an Ugré mother by a Kabatriya male, he was condamued by law to live without
the city-gates, to feed in broken vessels, to wear the clothes of the dead, to possess
no property but asses and dogs, and to be excluded from all intercourse with any
other tribe except the Chandala, with whom he is really on a par. His office is
that of public executioner, and to carry out the dead bodies of those who died
without kindred. Perhaps in no country but India could men be found to submit,
from a mere accident of birth, to so unenviable an existence ;-but the indolent and
contemplative Hindd is satisfied if he only be left undisturbed to fulfil the
wretched duties of his caste, convinced that his birth was the punishment of crimes
committed in a former existence. .

2 Seo Schlegel’s note on his reading, yat sukkam. I have ventured to adopt
the reading yah sukham which he mentions, as yielding a better sense, and being
less forced in the construction.

%® Contain within them the germ of pain, which they afterwards prodece, as the
womb contains the embryo of the child.’ Schlogel was induced, by the usual
mesning of such compounds, to translate this (of which the second member was
the word yoni) ‘are peodoed by pain.’ Lassen supports the present correction in a
long note. The meaning is obvious, and explained by what follows. No plecsure,
which arises from the senses, can be lasting ; but is, on the contrary, always short-
lived ; and its very shortness and termination is, to a certain degree, painful,



===== PAGE 180 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF THE RENUNCIATION OF Actions. 41

body, is a devotee and a happy man. That devotee who is
happy at heart, internally at ease, as well as internally *
illumined,” partaking of the nature of the Supreme Being,
attains to extinction in the Supreme Being. Those Rishis,*
whose sins are destroyed, who have solved all doubt, who are
self-governed, and delight in the good of all beings, obtain
extinction in the Supreme Spirit. Extinction in the Supreme
Spirit is near at hand for those who are free from desire and
anger, and are temperate, of thoughts restrained, and who
know their own souls, The anchorite* who renders external
contact (really) external ; confines ® his gaze also to the space
between his two brows,** and equalizes the inspiration and
expiration which passes through the nostrils ;*" who restrains
his senses, heart and mind intent on final emancipation ; who
is free from desire, fear and anger ; is indeed always * emanci-

3 Contrasted with happiness derived from external and worldly objects.

% By spiritual knowledge.

38 The word is here used with the wide meaning of a holy and learned man.

¥ Contrary to custom, the sentence here extends over more than one shloka,
and we must look for its subject (the word muni) in shloka 28,

38 ‘The participle Arifwd also governs chakshus.

36 In Chapter VI. 13, the Muni is direéted to fix his gaze on the tip of his nose.
‘The object of both varicties of this inclogant exercise is the same, viz. to withdraw
his eyes, and cofscquently his thoughts, from worldly objects. ‘He must not, to
effect this, close his eyes, since that would bring sleep and destroy contemplation.

37 Seo Chapter LV. note 33.

3* That is, even during life, It refers to a state of spiritual abstraction which
ig called jéranmukti. ‘The Sinkhya and Yoga systems admit two kinds of final
emancipation of the soul from material existence, - The former is the true emanei-
pation, which takes place at the death of the body of a perfect devotee, when his
soul is absorbed again into the Supreme Spirit from which it originally emanated,
now to emanate no more. ‘The latter, jfvanmukti, is not real emancipation, since
material cxistence continues, but a state of such complete abstraction of tho soul
from the body, that it is spiritually united to and almost absorbed into the
Suprome §) According to Kapila, the absorption is complete, and he com
pares life after it to a potter's wheel, which continues to revolve for a short time
afler the pot has been finished. Life gocs on as if the soul were still within the
body, for nature is not spent. According to Patanjali, howover, the absorption is
not complete, and there is always danger of  rclapsc even from’ this exalted state
of spiritualism ; while often the Muni is subject to the jealousy of the inferior
deities, who atiempt to seduce him through the ministry of beantifal nymphs,
teductions which form tho topic of many a Sanskrit ale Ward (Views of
Hindostan, vol. i p. 280, oe) gives rules, which he calle Patanal' for providing
against such a relapse. ‘The Vodénta systom added a third kind of mukti, which,
however, was not complete, but consisted in the soul's rising to the highest



===== PAGE 181 / 300 =====

42 BHAGAVAD-GiITA. CHAPTER THE FIFTH.

pated.- Knowing that I, the great lord of all worlds, am the
enjoyer of his sacrifices and mortification, and am well-
disposed to all creatures, he obtains tranquillity.’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Fifth Chapter,
by name

‘ DEVOTION BY MEANS OF THE RENUNCIATION OF ACTIONS,’

material heaven, that of Brahmi. For a more detailed account of this curious
doctrine, see Barthélemy St. Hilaire’s ‘ Premicr Mémoire sur le Sankhya-Kérik6,’
Paris, 1852, pp. 248 and 370.
% These worlds are many. ‘The commonest classification is of three only :
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, But in the Sinkhya and Veddnta systems, cight
ions of material existence were distinguished in the following descending order :
1. Brakmatoka, the world of the superior Deities ; 2. Pitriloka, that of the Pitris,
Rishis, and Prajipatis; 3. Somaloka, of the moon or planets; 4, Indraloka, of the
inferior Deities; 6. Gandharvaloka, of heavenly spirits; 6, Rdkghasaloka ;
1. Yakphaloka ; 8. Pishdchaloka, those of giants and demons.


===== PAGE 182 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE SIXTH.

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘He who, careless as to the fruit of his actions, performs
such actions as must be done,' is both renouncer (sannydst)
and devotee (yogt); not he who kindles no sacrificial fire, and
performs no ceremonies? Know, O son of Pandu! that what
they call renunciation is, in fact, devotion? For no one is a
devotee who has not (previously) renounced all (earthly) plans
of interest. The action of an anchorite, who is eager to
ascend to devotion, is called a means; and when he has
ascended to devotion, even his cessation of action is called a
means.> For when he is attached neither to the objects of
the senses, nor to actions, and has renounced all (earthly)
plans, he is then said to have ascended to devotion. Let him
raise his soul by his own means; let him not lower his soul,
for he is his soul’s friend and also his soul’s enemy. His self
is a friend to the soul of that man who has subdued his self
by his soul.’ But from the enmity of what is not spiritual,

1 The duties of caste and religious offices.

® Not he who merely neglects them out of idleness, and does not supply their
placo with devotion,

3 See Ch. V. note 1.

* Of obtaining a state of devotion.

© Of attainimg to final emancipation.

* It must be remembered that the word dfman has the two meanings of ‘self?
and ‘soul,’ which are here very philosophically distinguished. ‘The soul, as wo
know, is considered quite distinct from the body, and lodged within it on earth to
work out its ‘salvation. But the individual self” in this world consists of soul
and body together ; and though the body, influenced by the rajo-guna, or evil
impulse is naturally hostile t0 the wholo person, if allowed to have the upper
hand, itis nevertholess ita friend, if subdued by the soul, ee bing the means by
which the soul obtains emancipation from material cxistence.

7 When a man has subdued his self (é.e. his body enlivened by the soul,
together with its lusts, passions and natural inclination to evil) by means of his


===== PAGE 183 / 300 =====

44 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SIXTH.

his self might be an enemy, as it were, to his own soul.®
The soul of the self-subdued and passiopless man is intent
on the Supreme Being® in cold and heat, pleasure and
pain, and honour and ignominy. The devotee whose soul
is sated with spiritual knowledge and spiritual discernment,'°
who stands above all, whose senses are subdued; to whom
a lump of earth, a stone, and gold are alike; is called
“devoted.” He who is of the same mind to friends, ac-
quaintances, and enemies, to the indifferent and the neutral,
to aliens" and relatives, to the good and bad, is greatly
esteemed.!? A devotee should always exercise himself, re-
maining in seclusion and solitude, restraining his thoughts
and himself, without indulging hopes and without posses-
sions,!® keeping a settled couch for himself in an undefiled
spot, not too lofty nor too low,'! and with a sheet and skin

soul (the soul being the superior, the reasonable, and the governing part of the
whole solf), his solf is then the friend of his soul; since self, or the union of soul
and body, is the means by which emancipation may be effected.

® Wilkins and Galanos have quite disregarded the meaning of the several words,
and run off at once to the apparent sense of the whole sentence. Schlegel, as
usual, has translated word for word, without giving, as fur as I can see, any

eral sense. I confess that, at best, the whole sentence soems to be qne of those

rahmanical quibbles, redolent of tautology and alliteration, which would appear
to be written to mystify and awe the humble student, and to afford employment
and delight to the pedantic scholiast, ‘

® The word paramétmd may be taken as a compound of parama and dtmd, or
simply resolved into param and dfmd. Galanos and Schlegel have adopted the
former construction ; though without, as fur as I can see, any clear result, and
with a forced rendering of the compound.

1 For an explanation of the difference between jndna and eijndna, seo Ch. VII.
note 2.

1 Lit,, ‘Those who should be hated.’ Its opposition to bandin, those who are
bound by some tie or other, determines its meaning here. To the Hindd, as
indeed to all races who cherish the bonds of blood, al! that is foreign is hateful.

12 Another reading, equally good, is vimuchyate, ‘is liberated.’ *

19 Comp. IV. 21. Parigrata is that which surrounds a man, be it his family
and attendants, or his possessions. ‘The context in both cases has induced me to
prefer the latter meaning. ’

% That is on level ground, where there would be no view, as from a hill
to distract his attention; and he would not, as in a valley, be hemmed in by
worldly objects. “Ihe placo usually chosen by the Muni as his retreat was in a
jungle, on the bank of a river of fresh running water to drink and to bathe in, in
8 spot where the jungle had been partially cleared, and to which the wild beasts

ceased to resort.


===== PAGE 184 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF SELF-RESTRAINT. 45

(to cover him), and kusha'® grass (to lie on). Then fixing
his heart on the ope object,!¢ restraining his thoughts, senses
and actions, seated on his couch, he should practise devotion
for the purification of his soul. Holding his body, head and
neck,!7 all even and immoveable, firmly seated, regarding
(only) the tip of his nose,® and not looking around in
different directions, the devotee should remain quiet, with
passionless soul, free from anxiety, remaining under the vow
of a Brahmachéri,!® restraining his heart, meditating and
intent on me. A devotee, who always exercises himself thus,
and restrains his heart, attains to that tranquillity, the
supreme extinction, which is conjoined with me. He who
eats too much has no devotion, nor yet he who does not eat
at all, nor he who is given to oversleeping, nor also to over-
watching,” Arjuna! Devotion, which destroys pain, is pro-
duced in one of moderate fecding and recreation, of moderate
exertion in his actions, of moderate sleeping and waking.
When he directs his well-governed thoughts towards himself
only, and is free from desire as regards all wishes, he is then
called “devoted.” “As a candle placed in shelter from the
wind does not flicker,”—this simile is recorded of the devotee
of restrained thoughts, who practises devotion of the soul.

18 This is the “Pon cynosuroides,’ a grass, which, for some unknown reason,

lays an important part in many of the Hind rites und ceremomes, but particu
fanly in the sacrifice, being lnid beneath the sacrificial fire. The origin of its use
may perhaps be connected with the forest and nomad life of the Aryan race in its
earliest age. In this place its uses were, therefore, manifold, forming ut once the
material for tho Yogi's couch, and fur the rites which he would daily have to
perform.

© The Supreme Boing.

Ww er ay explanation of this compound, seo Wilson’s Sanskrit Grammar,
sect. 272.

38 See Ch. V. note 36.

1 Brahmachdri (lit, ‘follower of the Vedas,’ from brakman, ‘the Vedas,’ and
char, ‘too’ (Wilson’s Dictionary), but better, ‘one who secks to obtain the
Supreme Spirit,’ from Brakman, ‘the Supreme Being, and char, ‘to follow’) is
the name given to a young man of the three principal castes, when pursuing ‘his
studies. It is taken generally to designate a man whe Preserves the vows of
chastity and temperance, by which the student is bound. ‘The continuance under
such a vow is here marked by sthita,

% Devotion consists in moderation, not in excess or fanatical abstinence.


===== PAGE 185 / 300 =====

46 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SIXTH.

Let him know that the separation from the connection of
pain, in which thought ceases,?! preyented by worship in
devotion, and in which, beholding his own soul through his
mind’s eye,” he is content with himself; in which he ex-
periences whatever infinite pleasure the mind can receive,
beyond the reach of the senses; and moreover, remaining in
which, he does not verge from the truth, and after receiving
which he thinks no other acquisition superior to it, and
during whiclt he is not moved even by severe pain—is known
as “devotion.”** This devotion should be practised with that
determination by which thought becomes indifferent® (to
every worldly object). He who has abandoned all desires
which spring from imagination, and has, by means of his
heart, kept back the whole collection of the senses ® from
every direction (in which they would go), should gradually
become passive by his mind’s acquiring firmness, and, by
having caused his heart to remain within himself,” should not
place his thoughts on anything at all. And keeping it back
from those various * objects, to which the restless, unsteady
heart wanders forth, he should bring it beneath his own
control. For the highest happiness ® accrues to that devotee
of tranquil heart who, having set at rest the natural quality

21 Thoughts on worldly objects.
 Lit., ‘by himself’

% The rest of this arddha-shloka, which the English construction obliged us to
transfer to shloka 20, is a play on the sound of the word yoga, and might be trans-
lated, ‘junction (with the Supreme Spirit), is disjunction from the conjunction
with pain’ We must suppose that this ringing of words Presented something
very pleasant and poetical to the Hindé ear, for such a triviality would be other-
wise unworthy of the gravity of a philosophical poem, however admiesible in the
‘airy fairy Lilian’ of a Tennysoniet lyric.

% J have followed Schlegel’s reading and translation, and bog to refer the
reader to his note for its defence. The meaning is explained by shloka, 26.

3 A Sanskrit mode of expressing ‘all the sonscs,’ both of perception and action,

iM The senses aro supposed to be attracted towards the objects which they com-
prehend, oy

Not allowing it to wander after external and worldly objects.

2% Expressed by the repetition of the pronouns.

« ® Final emancipation,


===== PAGE 186 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF SELF-RESTRAINT. 47

of badness, partakes of the nature of the Supreme Spirit,
and is sinless, The devotee who is free from sin, and thus
devotes himself continually, enjoys, without trouble, supreme
felicity—the contact of the Supreme Spirit. The soul which
is devoted to devotion, perceives the spirit existing in all
things, and all things in the spirit, regarding everything
alike in everything! I do not vanish from him who sees me
in everything and everything in me, nor does he vanish from
me. That devotee who worships me as existing in all
things, if intent on unity (of object),** lives in me, in what-
ever way he may live.*t He who, by comparison with himself,
regards everything as the same, be it pleasure or pain,
Arjuna ! is considered a most excellent devotee.’

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘T do not see any (possible) steady continuance, O slayer of
Madhu! in this devotion of equanimity which thou hast
declared, on account of the variability (of the heart). For the
heart is fickle, Krishna, full of agitation, headstrong, and
obstinate. I believe the restraint of it to be as difficult as
that of the wind.’

° THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘The heart, O strong-armed one! is doubtless fickle and
difficult to restrain. But it may be restrained, O son of
Kunti! by practice and temperance. It is my opinion that

% The rajo-guna.

31 This is here said of the universal spivit (akphara or kitastha), which, as we
shall see, was believed to pervade and exist in, and at the same time comprehend,
matter.’ Nothing requires more care throughout our poem than to determine
when dtmd isto be rendered simply by ‘self,’ when by ‘soul,’ and when by ‘spirit.’
The tense is here determined by the following shioka.

3 T remain for ever dwelling in him and he in me.

3 On the Supreme Being, the one object.

™ Whether he live in the world, following out the duties of his caste; or,
in the solitude of the jungle, as an ascetic.

wu


===== PAGE 187 / 300 =====

48 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SIXTH.

devotion is very difficult for one, who is not self-governed, to
obtain. But it can be obtained by the self-governed, who
uses efforts, by (proper) means.”

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘What path® does the ungoverned take, O Krishna!
if gifted with faith, but with a heart which wanders from
devotion ; since he does not attain to the perfection of devo-
tion? Does he not perish like a broken cloud, ejected from
both (heaven and emancipation),** not remaining steady,”
O strong-armed one! and deluded in the path® of the
Supreme Being? Thou shouldest completely dispel this doubt
for me, Krishna! for there is none other to dispel this doubt
than thou.’

TUE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Such a man, O son of Prithé! does not perish in this
world nor hereafter.» For no one who acts uprightly goes to
perdition, The man who fails in devotion (only) attains to
the regions of the righteous,” and having there dwelt for
years of infinite‘ number, is born again (on carth) in the
body of the chaste? and the fortunate ;* or again he is even
begotten in a family of wise devotees. For régeneration in

38 After death, since devotion is the only means of obtaining final emancipation.

2 We abandons the law of rites and ceremonies of the established religion, to
follow the doctrine of devotion. In this, however, he fails; and he would, there-
fore, naturally luse heaven, the reward of the first j and final emancipation, that of
the second.

37 That is, Constant to the established religion,

38 Deluded by the wavering of his heart in the pursuit of devotion.

3 Lit., ‘Elsewhere ;” namely, ‘after death.” °

4 See Ch. V. note '39. Tho regions hore alluded to are the first five, the
worlds of the just; and it is according to his amount of righteousness, to which of
these the soul is transported.

41 This at first sight would seem to be a Sanskrit ‘ bull,’ but the word must be
taken in a comparative sense, His sojourn seemé infinite, compared to his mun-
dane existence; and, as the duration of the universe is not less than five millions
of years, this is exiremely natural.

Of the Brahman caste.

© Of the Kehatriya caste.

Thus improving his chance of final emancipation.



===== PAGE 188 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF SELF-RESTRAINT. 49

the world, of such a kind as this, is more difficult to obtain.
In that (body) he re-assumes the mental application of his
former body, and from that time struggles more diligently
towards perfection, O son of Kuru! For, even against his
will, he is carried away by his former practice. Even if
anxious to learn devotion, he only surmounts the verbal
deity. But the devotee‘? who continues striving with
energy, purged from his sins, is perfected after several re-
generations, and thence reaches the highest walk! The
devotee is deemed superior to ascetics, and even to those
gifted with spiritual knowledge, and to those who trust to
works (alone). But of all > devotces even, he who, seeking
me by his inmost spirit, worships me, full of faith, is con-
sidered by me the most devoted.’

Thus in the Upanishads, ctc., (stands) the Sixth Chapter,
by name

‘ DEVOTION BY MEANS OF SELF-RESTRAINT.’

« It is a curious part of the doctrine of transmigration, as received by this
sehool, that the soul was supposed—in a future life on carth, not, as it were, to
begin ‘afresh and to be born with a new character and disposition—but to start
from the ‘point at which it had left off in its foimer body. ‘Thus, the samo
virtuous of vicious inclinations accompanied it, and not only were its former
actions punished *during its present cxistence, but its former difficulties still
surrounded and impeded it,

48 He docs not really approach the Supreme Spirit spiritually, but only acquires
‘a mental knowledge of him, as declarcd by his teachers and by philosophy.

4” He has hitherto been speaking of the man who is not, though he strives to
Decome, a devotee. He now speaks of the real self-governed devotee.

4 The devotee himself is liable to regeneration, because it is only perfection in
devotion that brings immediate emancipation from matter in this life.

« The Supromo Spirit.

% The devotce unites all theso characters in his own. He practises ascetic
exercises, acquires spiritual knowledge, and performs such works as sacrifice, alms
giving, and mgrtification. But since he adds devotion to them all, he is superior
to each of those who trust in these. The tapasioin, or ascetic, who tears his flesh,
starves himself to a skeleton, and 60 forth, wrongly imagines that these acts alone
will procure him emancipation. ‘The follower of the Sinkhya doctrines, who
relies on his knowledge of that philosophy, and neglects everything else, is equally
mistaken ; and so is the man who rigidly fulfils the duties of caste, and the ordi-
nances of the established religion.

4 Eleven kinds of devotees are mentioned in Ch. IV. 25-30, Hero a stress is
probably to be laid on the ‘me,’ and this kind of devotee maly be any one of those
leven, who, to his devotion, adds the belief in the identification of Vishnu, and
his incarnation Kyighpa with the Supreme Spirit—in short, a Vaighnava or
Bhagavata Yogi.



===== PAGE 189 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.'

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Hear, O son of Prithé! how, with thy heart attached
to me, practising devotion, and seeking me as a refuge,
thou mayest know me entirely and without uncertainty.
I will declare to thee fully both spiritual knowledge
and spiritual discernment,? and when that is known,
there remains nothing more besides to be learnt upon earth.
Among thousands of mortals a single one, perhaps, strives
after perfection, and even of those who do strive after
it and attain it, a single onc, perhaps, really under-
stands me. Earth, water, fire, wind, ether, heart and intel-
lect also, and egotism, into these eight components is my
nature divided.’ This (nature) is an inferior one, but learn

1 We now commence a new division of shna's doctrine, As has been
described in the Introduction, our poem must be divided into three principal parte,
each containing six chapters. ‘The first part treats of the Doctrines of the Yoga
system with reference to its practice and results. ‘The last is purely philosophical.
theoretical and speculative (with the exception of Ch. XVIII.); and the second

art, to which we now come, treats of Theology, the nature and attributes of the
Supreme Spirit, and his relation to the universe and mankind, The first part may
be called Patanjali’s, the last the Sankhya school, and the present the peculiar
province of the ‘ Bhagavad-Gita,’ the description of the Deity as a Supreme and
‘an Universal Spirit, and his identification with Vishnu and Krishna. This
Chapter treats of that spiritual discernment /vijudua), by which the Supreme
Spirit may be distmguislied in and from the universe; in refutation of those, on
the one hand, who deify certain portions of creation; and of the Sankhya school,
on the other, which asserts all creation to be the work of a common plastic prin-
ciple /prakriti).

2 The difference between jndna, spiritual knowledge, and vijndna, spiritual dis-
cernment, is briefly this. “Jndna is the whole plulosophie knowledge, which
embraces alike the Supreme Being, the universe, the soul, and every other kind of
knowledge necessary"tor salvation. Vijndna is a more special knowledge, which
comprehends the Supreme Spirit only, and that, too, in his relation to matter,

3 ‘To comprehend this and the following shlokas properly, a perusal of that part
of the Introduction, which treate of the delaile of the Suaklya system, is quite



===== PAGE 190 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL DISCERNMENT. 51

my superior nature other than this, of a vital kind, O hero!
by means of which this universe is sustained. Understand
that all things are produced from this latter nature. I am
the cause of the production and dissolution of the whole
universe! There exists no other thing superior to me,> O de-
spiser of wealth! On me is all the universe suspended, as num-
bers of pearls on a string.® I am? the savour in the waters,®
O son of Kunt{! and the luminous principle in the moon and

necessary, as it is beyond the limits of our notes to give more than a summary of
what is now referred to. Nature /prakriti) is nothing here but another name for
matter generally which Krishna calls ‘mine,’ because matter in its essential form
‘was. part of the Supreme Spirit himself, who, as we know, was supposed to be the
material, as well as the efficient cause of the universe. "This matter consists in
two forms. First, that of material essence, here identified with the principle of
material life, which is the plastic principle of Kapila’s system, and is commonly
called nature (prakriti) ‘par excellence ;’ and also pradhdna, milapradhdna, ete.,
Dut here simply the superior nature, the avyakta, or non-developed matter.
Secondly, vyak/a, or matter in its developed form, the universe ; all things com-
monly comprehended under the head of matter, here called the inferior nature.
The latter properly consists of twenty-three Coniponents, but eight only are here
mentioned, in which the rest are comprehended. ‘These eight are divisible into the
two great heads, which we commonly call matter and mind: namely, the five
grosser elements /mahdbhita), for matter properly so called, under which must be
comprehended the five subtile elements /tanmadtra/, and the five organs of actions ;
and for mind, or internal matter :—first, the internal organ of perception /manas/,
under which we must here rank the five senses, which the manas governs and
collects; second, memory /ahankdra), realization, or conscience ; and third, judg-
ment, intéllect /buddhi). ‘The order of all these is regularly inverted, beginning
with the grossest element, earth, and ending, not with buddh:, the first product of
nature, but irregtlarly with ahankdra, the second. The reason of the inversion
is the same as that which places the inferior (eyakta) before the superior
Cavyakte) nature, namely, of prosenting more poetically to the less philosophic
mind, the more tangible before the more mysterious.

« Like Kapila, our author gives to nature /avyakta) the part of father of all
matter (ryakta), but he qualifics the statement by immediately adding that the
Supreme Spirit is the cause of the working of that principle. Nature is passive,
and has no will of its own ; and it is the Deity alone that causes matter to emanate
from it, and again to be absorbed within it,

5 Nature is superior to the universe, soul to nature, and God to soul ; but there
is nothing superior to God.

© A similegat once apt and beautiful, and the watchword of philosophers of this
school. ‘The Kosmos is likened to a necklaco; the Supreme Spirit, on which its
existence depends, to the string. Take away the string, and the necklace exists
no more, The beads indeed exist, but their connection, their unity, and the actual
necklace they formed, exists no more. Take away from the universe the Supreme
Spirit, and there would remain a chaos of material objects, without order, life or
reason.

7 This is now exemplified in shlokas 8—11 by a number of instances, destined
to show that the Supreme Spirit is the essential and principal, if not actually
material part of everything.

® The peculiar property of water was considered to be taste. See Introduction.



===== PAGE 191 / 300 =====

52 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.

sun, the mystic syllable “Om!” in all the Vedas,? the sound
in the ether,!° the masculine essence in men, the sweet smell
in the earth;" and I am the brightness in the flame, the
vitality in all beings, and the power of mortification in
ascetics, MKnow, O son of Prith&! that I am the eternal seed
of all things which exist; I am the intellect of those beings
who possess intellect, the strength of the strong? And I am
the power of the strong in action, which is free from desire
and passion.’® I am the lust in all beings, which is pre-
vented by no law.!# And know that all dispositions,!5
whether good, bad, or indifferent, proceed also from me.
I do not exist in them, but they in me. All this universe
being deluded by these threc'® kinds of dispositions, com-
posed of the three qualities, does not recognize me, the
imperishable, who am superior to them. For this divine
illusion " of mine, effected by the natural qualities, is difficult
to surmount. Those who have recourse to me only can sur-
mount that illusion. Evil-doers, fools, and low men, deprived

t lg As being that with which cach hymn commences, and which hallows all that
follows,

1 Andibleness is the peculiar property of ether (dkdsha). See Introduction.

4 Smell is that of earth. See Introduction. ‘

12 Reason in man and physical strength in animals,

12 The powers /vibhiti) acquired by the good who act in freedom from self-
interest or passion.

4 The desire of copulation, which nothing can prevent, though religion may
restrain it. Be careful to separate the compound into dharma + aviruddha, by
neglect of which Wilkins, Chézy, and Langlois have fallen into egregious error.
Bee Schlegel’s note.

38 These are the characters of all beings, whether gods, demons, men, or
animals, and are mixtures of the three qualities (gva7/ in different proportions.
‘When he says that he does not exist in them, he docs not detract from his
character of universal and omnipresent Being. ‘These dispositions b:long to none
of the categories of existing things. ‘They are neither nature, matter, soul, nor
spirit, but abstract independent foices influencing all matter.

18 As the qualities (guna) are three in number, so are the dispositions three in
kind, eceording to the preponderance of each quality in each of them. "

1 This mdyd, which is explained at length in the Introduction, generally refers,
asin the Vedanta system, which borders on nihilism, to the whole creation, con-
sidered as having né real existence, but only appearing to man to exist. It would
seem here to allude to the influence of the qualities on matter, by which the real
relation of mattor to spirit is disguised, and the former only appears really to exist,


===== PAGE 192 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL DISCERNMENT. 53

of spiritual knowledge by this illusion, and inclining towards
the disposition of the Asuras,® do not have recourse to me.
Four kinds of upright men worship me, O Arjuns ! (viz.) the
afflicted, he who is desirous of knowledge, he who is desirous
of some possession,!® and he who is possessed of spiritual
knowledge, O prince of the Bharatas! Of these, the best ® is
the one who is possessed of spiritual knowledge, if he always
practises devotion, and confines his worship to me alone. For
I am dear to the spiritually-wise beyond possessions?" and he
is dear tome. All of these (four) are indeed excellent, but
the spiritually-wise is verily myself? to my thinking. For,
with devoted soul, he has approached even me, the highest
path. At the conclusion of many generations the spiritually-
wise proceeds towards me. A great-minded man who (is
convinced) that “ Vdsudeva® is everything,” is difficult to
find. Those who are deprived of spiritual knowledge by
a diversity*! of desires, adopt divers*! rites of worship,

18 Asura is here 2 general name for the cnomies of the gods, the giants and
demons who inhabit Patila, below the earth. As the saftwa-guna, or quality of
goodness, predominates in the gods, and the rajo-quna, or active badness, in man ;
0 the taho-grna, or bad indifference and obscurity, preponderates in the disposi-
tion of the Asuras; and those men whose dispositions resemble theirs are therefore
the worst and lowest, and blinded by the influence of the qualities, deceived by the
appearanee only of the universe, do not recognize tho existence of the Supreme

ing.

© Whether wealth, progeny, happiness, or anything else of that kind.

2 Because the motives of the other threo were selfish.

2 The translators have all taken the commoncr meaning of atyartham as an
adverb, and rendered it by ‘oxtremely.’ I confess I think the word has here a
more prominent and emphatic force, and that the context demands the translation
I havo given. To the afflicted, hoping for consolation, to the seeker of somo
possession, and the thiister after knowledge, some object (artha) is dear, and
prompts their worship, ‘To the spiritually-wise the Supreme Being alone is dear
above all sudh objects,

2 A preferable reading, not, however, supported by any MS., would be
dtmd + iva. As they stand, tho words dfmd + era ean only be explained by
supposing (i to be understood after them. Madhustidana, the scholiast, explains
them by na matto bhivaah, ‘not severed from mo,’ ée, ‘united with me in spirit ;?
and this is, perhaps, supported by the next arddha-shloka,

2 Properly a name of Krishna, as son of Vasudeva (seo Index) ; but generally
usurped for Vighpu himeelf, particularly in his identificatich with the Supreme

spirit,

% The indefiniteness is expressed by the repetition of the pronoun.



===== PAGE 193 / 300 =====

54 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.

directed by their own natures, and have recourse to other
deities (than me). If any one worshipping with faith,
desire to reverence any personage, I make that faith of his
constant. Gifted with such faith, he seeks the propitiation of
this (personage), and from him receives the pleasant objects
of his desires, which were directed by me alone.** But the
reward of these little-minded men is finite” They who
sacrifice to the gods, go to the gods. They who worship me,
come to me. The foolish, ignorant of my lofty, incorruptible
supreme being, think that I, who am not manifested, am
endowed with a manifest form. Surrounded by my magic
illusion, I am not manifest to everybody. This deluded ®
world does not comprehend me, who neither am born nor die.
I know all beings, past, present, and future, O Arjuna! but
no one knows me. All beings fall into error as to the nature
of the creation, Bharata! by reason of that delusion of
natural opposites,” which springs from liking and disliking,

% Those, for instance, who desire future happiness in heaven, worship Indra;
those who wish’ for wealth, Kuvera; those who long for victory, Skanda ; and
80 on.

2 The translation of this passage by Schlegel is quite arbitrary and facompre-
hensible, If I have not succeeded in making it more intelligible, I have at least
confined myself to the literal meaning of the words, and can only+ffer an explana-
tion of the sense generally. Janu is literally ‘a body,’ and is here used to dis-
tinguish all objects of worship generally, whether gods, demons, or earthly objects,
from the one object of the spiritually-wise—the Supreme Spirit. If a man, then,
having some desire at heart, and believing that prayers and sacrifice will bring it
about, seeks to what deity, demon, or other object of worship he shall address
himself, the Supreme Spirit himself, existing within such objects, directs his faith
in the right direction, confirms and establishes it. ‘Thus the man, with his faith
directed to the proper object, propitiates it by prayer and sacrifice, and obtains his
reward. In other words, the Supreme Being not only recognizes the established
religion, but even arranges it as it should be, and is the means of encouraging and
directing the connection between man and his superiors. Schlegel rightly
observes that éasydrddhana must be resolved into tasyds and drddhana, and quotes
Réméyana, i. 44,9. Zasyds is feminine as referring to tanu. .

27 Since even the Gods are doomed to a final destruction. The reward of those
who worship the Supreme Spirit is eternal, since he and he only is immortal.

28 Believe some one of the gods, as Brahma, Vishnu, or Shiva, to be the
Supreme Spirit himself. Our philosopher would seem to be cutting his own throat
on this ground. + |

% Deluded by mdyd, or the appearance of things, some believe even the highest
Being to be born and mortal, since they perceive that this is the lot of all matter.

% These natural opposites are heat or cold, pain or pleasure; and the delusion



===== PAGE 194 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL DISCERNMENT. 55

O tormentor of thy foes! But those men who act uprightly,
in whom sin is dead, freed from this delusion of the natural
opposites, worship me firm in devotion. They who turn to
me and strive after liberation from regeneration and death,
know that whole supreme spirit, and the Adhyétma,* and
entire action, They who know me to be the Adhibhita,?
the Adhidaiva,®! and the Adhiyajna,” and also (know me to
be thus), in the hour of death know me indeed.’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Seventh Chapter,
by name

‘ DEVOTION THROUGH SPIRITUAL DISCERNMENT.’

they cause arises from aversion from the one, or hiking for the other. By these
feelings man seeks his own interest only in his worship, and then falls into error
as to the real cause of the creation of matter, which he believes to be subservient
to his enjoyment, and not to the emancipation of the soul from material life.

31 As these words aro explained in the beginning of the next Chapter, it is
superfluous to attempt to do so here. .

32 Compare VIII. 2, 6, and 13, Vidus has here an emphatic force, as pashyati
has in V. 6, and XIII. 29, It not only indicates the possession of spiritual know-
ledge, but the attainment of that final emancipation itself, which is acquired by
that knowledge. ‘They know me indeed, thoroughly, truly; end sinc this know.
edge continues with them till the hour of their death, they are by it liberated
from material life.’


===== PAGE 195 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

ABJUNA SPOKE.

‘What is that Supreme Spirit? What is Adhy&tmaP!
what action ? O best of men! and what is called Adhibhuta P!
and what is said to be Adhidaiva?! and how can there be

1 Before entering on an explanation of these terms, we must remind the reader
that this portion of our pocm is a treatise on Theology, an explanation of
that Supreme Being who is the object of the worshup of the Yogi, and the head of
the whole theistic /sesicura) branch of the Sankhya school. ‘This Being may be
regarded under many divers aspects, and Braima, or the Supreme Spirit, which he
mentions first, is the general name which includes these four others.—First,
-Adhydtma is composed of the prep. adii, which has the signification of ‘ above,’
“superior to,’ ‘presiding over,’ and démd ‘soul.’ It means, therefore, ‘ that which
presides over the soul.’ In shloka 3, it is said to be swab;dra, ‘own nature,’
‘where a reflective force must be given to swa, as referring to the Supreme Spirit.
It is, then, the Supreme Spirit viewed in his relution to the soul, in which he is
known to be at the same time that soul itself and superior to it; the spjrit from
which it has emanated, but with which it is still intimately connected, in the
relation of an inferior part to a superior whole.—Sccond, Adhibhita is composed
of adhi, ‘superior to,’ * presiding over,’ and dhda, ‘that which exis's.’ It is,
therefore, ‘ that which presides over what exists ;’ and refers to the Supreme Being
in his relation to the whole universe, in his connection with matter, as himself con-
taining the essence of matter with him. In shluka 4 it is explained by the words
Ksharo-bhdvah, ‘divisible nature,’ which must refer to prakriti, the essence of
matter, which we know is divisible in its development into twenty-three categories.
This, again, is referred to the Supreme Spirit, by what he says in Ch. VIL. 30.—
Third, Adhidaiva, or, as in shloka 4, adhidaivata, is composed of adhs, * presiding
over,’ deva or devatd, ‘a deity,’ and here a general term for all superhuman beings.
It is, therefore, that ‘ which presides over the divine part of creation.’ In sbloka 4
it is explained by the word purusia, for a full evplanation of which we must
refer the reader to the Introduction, and to Chap. XV. of our poem.. Its literal
meaning is ‘man,’ and in the Sankhya system it means ‘the soul,’ which is the
real person of man, his body being merely'a temporary setting, as it were. In the
system of Patanjali, and the Bhagavad-Git4, in which an universal spirit, from
which the soul emanated, was first brought forward, it has two meanings: firstly,
that of the soul, the individual man; and, secondly, that of the Supremo Spirit,
from which the soul emanates, more usually called mahdpurusha, or purushottama,
the great or highest oul. In Ch. XV. of our pocm, we thall find a third meaning
attached to this word (shlokas 16—18), but it is in the second that we must here
‘understand it, although Humboldt (Zeitschrift der K. Academie zu Berlin, 1825)
bhinks that tbe word can only have this meaning when an epithet is attached to it ;



===== PAGE 196 / 300 =====

DEVOTION TO THE INDIVISIBLE SUPREME SPIRIT. 57

any Adhiyajna! here in this body,? O slayer of Madhu? And
how art thon to be known by the temperate in the hour
of death P”

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘The supreme universal spirit is the One simple and in-
divisible,’ and my own nature is called Adhyétma. The
emanation. which causes the existence and reproduction‘ of
existing things bears the name of Action. Adhibhuta is (my)
own indivisible nature, and Adhidaivata is the spiritual
person. Adhiyajna is myself here upon earth, in the body,
O best of embodied men! And he who, remembering me at
the moment of death, quits the body and comes forth, enters
my nature; there is no doubt about that. Or, again, what-
ever nature he thinks on, when he abandons the body at the
last, to that only does he go,’ O son of Kunti! having been

as in VIII. 22; X. 12; XI, 18 and 38; XV. 4, etc. Of these, XT. 38 seems to
favour my rendering, the epithet ddidera having so much similarity with the pre-
sent one of adhidaiva.—Fourth, Adhiyajna, compounded of adhi, ‘presiding over,’
and yajna, ‘sacrifice,’ ‘worship,’ is the object of worship, the keystone of religion.
This, saye Krishna, is myself, Vishnu, in this my present inearvation of Krishna,
under which form the Supreme Being is worshipped. Man is too material to be
able to worship the pure abstract idea of a Supreme universal Spirit. Some
tangiblé and manifest personitication was required for the less philosophic portion
of mankind, some adhiyajina, to give a defimtion and name to their faith; and
Krishna is thatadhiyajina, Galanos would take the word dehabhritdm with dehe,
and translate, ‘And Adhiyajna is I in all bodies.’ ‘This construction affords no
explanation of adhiyajna; and, moreover, forces on dehe a plural or at least
collective sense, which it cannot sustain.—To recapitulate, adhydtma is the
Supreme Spirit in his relation to man's soul ; adfibhiita, in his relation to matter ;
adhidaira, in his relation to tho divers objects of worship; adhiyajna, in his
relation to religion, the personified type.

2 Alluding to Krishna's body.

3 See Chapter III. note 18.

“Causes their original existence and the further production of other objects
from them.

5 ‘The maality of this passago at first sight seems dubious, It would appear to
rest a man's ealvation on a mere chance; or, ut best, on a death-bed repeutance.
Nothing of the kind is meant. No sudden death is here hinted at ; but a man is
supposed, when the awful hour of dissolution approaches, to tun with sll his
might andssoul to that Deity, whom a lifelong worship bas taught him to consider
his protector. If the desire of his heart has been the enjoyment 6f henven, the
Deity will have been Indra, and on bim will he think in the hour of death ; and
dy his heavon is his worship consequently rewarded, and go on. Moreover, a
wholesome warning is hereby administered aguinet relaxing in devotion ; for if
death overtake him, when the world and its cares have driven the object of his”
worship from his mind, his former devotion will avail him nought.



===== PAGE 197 / 300 =====

58 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

always conformed to that nature. Therefore think on me at
all times, and fight. If thy heart and mind are turned to me,
thou wilt doubtless attain to me alone. By thoughts applied
to diligent devotion, and turned to no other object (than me),
meditating ® on the Supreme Divine Person, one goes to him,
O son of Prith4! He who may meditate on the Sage? without
beginning ;® the regulator more minute than an atom; the
sustainer of all of incomprehensible form; bright as the sun
beyond the darkness, at the hour of death; with steady®
heart, embued with worship and by the strength of devotion
collecting his breath entirely between his eyebrows,! attains
that Supreme Divine Person. I will summarily expound to
thee that place" which those who know the Vedas call the
one Indivisible, which those who are temperate and free from
passion enter, and with the desire of which, men follow the
life of a Brahmachari.!? He who closes all the doors of the
senses," restrains his desires within his heart,'* disposes his
breath within his brow,!° practises perseverance in devotion,
utters the monosyllable “Om!” (which is) the Supreme
Spirit,!° meditating on me, and thus continues when he is

© The same accusative is here governed by both verbs, ydti and anuchintayan.
7 This and the following are all epithets of the Supreme Being. He is called a
sage (lit., ‘poet’) as being omniscient. He is the regulator and ordainer of all
things, more minute than an atom, yet greater than the whole universe. As the
sun illumines the whole world, that spirit illumines everything ; superior to the
darkness, which typifies the ignorance arising from the illusion of matter, and the
influence of the three qualities.
* Lit., ‘ancient,’ but used for ‘eternal ns to the past,’ for which no word exists
in Sanskrit, Compare Chapter II. note 19.
® Fixed on the one object only.
1 Compare Chapter IV. note 33,
11 The being of the Supreme Spirit, the spiritual region which he inhabits,
which, though infinite and undefined, is called a place.
12 See Chapter VI. note 19.
13 ‘The organs of sense, through which external objects penetrate to the heart.
14 Mark the distinction between manas, ‘ the abstract,’ and Arit, ‘ the concrete.’
Manas is the heart which desires, krit that which beats.
18 The mystic word being the verbal representative of the Supreme Being, just
as much es Brahma was the representative of is creative, Vighgu of his preserva-
tive, and Shiva of his destructive powers. ™


===== PAGE 198 / 300 =====

DEVOTION TO THE INDIVISIBLE SUPREME SPIRIT. 59

quitting the body, attains the highest walk.* I am easy of
access to that ever devoted devotee who remembers me, O son
of Prithé! with his thoughts never wandering to any other
object. The great-minded, who have recourse to me, reach
the highest perfection, and do not incur regeneration, which
is the domain of pain, and is not eternal. All worlds, up to
that of Byahmé," are subject to return,'* Arjuna! But he
who comes to me has no regeneration, O son of Kunti! Those
men who know the day of Brahmé, which ends~ after a
thousand ages; and the night which comes on at the end of
those thousand ages,” know day and night indeed. At the

1 Union with the Supreme.

17 See Chapter V. note 39.

19 The soul is always liable to return after a certain sojourn, and be born again
on earth, from any of the eight worlds, even including BrahmA’s, which is the
highest.

SP We havo here a mythological allusion, which is another proof that our philo»
sopher received much with implicit faith from the established belief. ‘To under-
stand it properly, we must remember the true character of Brahma, On the one
hand, he is the personification of the creative power of the Supreme Being; and,
on the other, he has taken the place, in mythology, of Sarya or the sun, the first

rson of the more primitive triad. As the sun begins ihe day on earth, and

rings all things into active life, Brahma begins that of the universe, by causin
all developed matter to issue or emanate from the prakriti, the non-develope
essence of matter. When, again, he sleeps, developed matter re-enters and is
absorbeg again into prakriti. Hence the supposed duration of tho universe in
each manifestation was called a day. Some have sought to attribute the system of
reckoning the qges to astronomical observations; but Wilson justly observes that
it is simply derived from a descending arithmetical progression, as 4, 3, 2, 1,—the
conversion of units into thousands, and the mythological fiction that these were
divine years, each composed of 360 years of men. Thus the four ages would be
thus reckoned—

‘The Krita-yuga has 4,000 divine years, equal to 1,440,000 mortal years,
8

Treti-yuga 3,000 1» 1,080,00 ”
Dwapara-yuga 2,000, » 720,000
Kali-yuga 1,000, 1» 860,000 »

Total 3,600,000
Certain poriods at the beginning and end of cach
yuga, called Sandhyés and Sandhydnshas,
equal to we se cee nae tee nee ee vee 720,000 »

Complete the period called MahGyuga, or great
ffge, which is equal to wes se wee ese axe 4,320,000 »
1,000 Mahéyugas make a day of Bralm&, which is called a Kalpa; 360 such
days compose his year, and 100 such years are his lifetime, called a Para. Thus
Brauhm's lifetime consists of 255,520,000,000 mortal, years, and during this
period the universe is supposed to emauate from and re-enter the material essence
oe Not oon but Mahéy tes of the f
fot common ages, yugas, or aggregates of the four common.
See preceding note. ome



===== PAGE 199 / 300 =====

60 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

approach of (that) all (objects of) developed matter come
forth from the non-developed principle.*! At the approach of
(that) night they are absorbed into that (principle) called the
non-developed. This collective mass itself of existing things,
(thus) existing again and again,” is dissolved at the approach
of that night. At the approach of (that) day it emanates
spontaneously, O son of Prithé! But there is enother in-
visible eternal existence, superior to this visible one, which
does perish when all things perish, called invisible and in-
divisible, This they call the highest walk. Those who
obtain this never return. This is my supreme abode. But
this supreme person, O son of Prithé! within whom all
existing things exist, and by whom all this universe is caused
to emanate, may be approached by devotion, which is intent
on him alone. But I will tell thee, O prince of the Bharatas!
at what time devotees dying obtain freedom from or sub-
jection to (the necessity of) return.** Fire,® day, the in-

1 Avyakta, prakriti, or nature, the non-developed essence of matter. See
Introduction.

® The repetition of the particle marks that of the state. The universe exists
again and again in each succeeding day of Brahma. °

23 Arasha cannot have its more usual signit ion of ‘against their will,’ since
matter being irrational, could have no will of its own, but rather, ‘without any
will of their own,’ #.e. in agreement with the laws of necessity.

% Return to earth, and investment with a new body.

% This and the following shloka startle us at first sight with the appearance of
the meanest superstition, and have called forth the lamentations and reproaches of
two able critics, Humboldt and Langlois. The matter is, however, somewhat
explained by the contents of the Uttaramimansa writings (see Colebrooke, Mise.
Essays, vol. i. p. 366). It must be remembered that the soul was supposed to be
accompanied in its transmigration by a subtile body (linga sharia: see Intro
duction), which it only abandons at final emancipation. ‘I'his is a vehicle of the
soul, which enables it, as long as it exists in a material life, to sustain its con-
neetion with matter, even when divested of a grosser body. In this srbtile body,
then, is the soul conducted to the divers matcrial heavens, when it quits the
mundane body ; and since this body requires a conductor and a light to show it the
way, a beam of the sun is supposed to meet the crown of the head at all seatons,
The seat of the soul is sup] to be the heart, from which 1,001 arteries conduct
to all parts of the bodies. The principal of these is the great coronal artery,
which leads from the heart to the crown of the head; by kis passage the soul,
with its linga sharira, proceeds at the moment of death. At the crown of the
head it meets with the guardian sunbeam ; and, at the periods first mentioned, the
ray being brighter and stronger, the subtile body can find its way to the highest
heaven, the Brahma-loka; if, on the contrary, it be weaker, as at other periods, it
Only proceeds to an inferior region, See also note 27 infra.



===== PAGE 200 / 300 =====

DEVOTION TO THE INDIVISIBLE SUPREME SPIRIT. 61

creasing moon, six months of the northern solstice; those
who die in this period, and who know the Supreme Spirit, go
to the Supreme Spirit. Again, smoke,** night, the waning
moon, six months of the southern solstice ; a devotee dying in
this period attains only a lunar” splendour, and returns.
For these two ways of white and black are eternally decreed
to the world. By the one a man goes without return, by the
other he returns again. No devotee, O son of Prith&! who
knows these two paths, is ever confounded. Thereforé, at all
periods, be devoted to devotion, Arjuna! A devotee who
knows all this, surmounts whatever reward is promised to the
study of the Vedas, or the practice of sacrifice, self-torture,
and almsgiving, and obtains the highest and best place.’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Eighth Chapter,
by name

‘ DEVOTION TO THE INDIVISIBLE SUPREME SPIRIT.’

% Smoke, as opposed to fire and hght, is put for darkness.

21 This may mean that he attains to the Soma-/oka, the region of the moon,
which is inferior to that of Brahma (sce Ch. Y. note 39). But I am inclined to
think that the whole passage has a metaphorical, not a literal, force. The
Supreme Being has been compared to the sun. ‘The whole aggregate of deities
inferior to him, who reflect his glory, may be aptly likened to the moon. Follow-
ing out this figure, the whole passage may be divested of its superstitious
character. ‘The Supreme Being is the sun, the ray from which to the crown
of the devotee's head, is the type of the spiritual connection of the Being with the
mortal’s soul. When devotion is at its highest pitch, this ray would be strongest,
and the Supreme Being might be considered to be’ in greater proximity to the
mortal, as the sun is to that portion of the earth which it lights up in day-time,
in the light half of the month, and during the summer solstice. In the Uttara-
m{mansa, this theory is doubtless taken literally and superstitiously ; but I cannot
help thinking that our poet has borrowed a popular superstition merely as an apt
‘and elegant poctical metaphor. Compare also Manu, iv. 182, where the Soma-
‘oka, or heaven of the moon, is replaced by a Devaloka, or heaven of the inferior

.

ties,


===== PAGE 201 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE NINTH.

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

«But now? I will declare unto thee, if thou objectest not,
the most mystic spiritual knowledge coupled with spiritual
discernment, having learnt which, thou wilt be liberated from
evil. This is a kingly science and a kingly mystery,’ the
most excellent of purifications, clearly comprehensible, in
accordance with law,’ very easy to carry out, and immutable.
Men who do not put faith in this religion, O harasser of thy
foes! do not attain to me, but return to the path of this
world of mortality. All this universe has been created
by me, embodied as the undeveloped principle. All things
exist in me. I do not dwell within them, and yet things do
not exist in me.5 Behold this my lordly mystery. My spirit,
which causes® things to exist, sustains existing things, but
does not dwell in them. Understand that even as the

1 Expressed in the idam, lit., ‘the following.’

2 ‘This must refer to the Yoga system, not merely to the philosophic explanation
about to follow, since he says that it is ‘easy to carry out.”

3 With the established religion, since it admitted its principal tenets and
ordinances, the existence of the gods, the institution of caste, ete., and urged
aman to perform his duty according to those ordinances, in contradistinction to
the pure Sankhya system, which lauded the abandonment of all these.

« Prakriti or nature, the material essence, which this school considered to be
part of the Supreme Being himself, he being regarded as twofold, spirit and
matter, or rather material essence, which the Puranas call the wife of the
Supreme Being.

© Krighna is not wrong when he calls this apparent contradiction a sovereign
myrtery. ‘But it is easily explained when we regard the Supreme Buing in his
twofold character of spirit and material essence. As material essence, the material
cause of all things, they all exist within him ; as Spirit only, they, being matter,
cannot exist within him,.since spirit and matter have no direct connection. Again,
‘a8 spirit only, he does not exist in them, since the spirit cannot be inherent
in matter.

«. © Being the efficient and rational cause.



===== PAGE 202 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF KINGLY KNOWLEDGE AND MYSTERY. 63

mighty air,’ which wanders everywhere, always dwells within
the ether, so all existing things exist within me. At the
conclusion of a Kalpa,é all existing things, O son of Kunti!
re-enter nature, which is cognate with me. But I cause them
to come forth again at the beginning of a Kalpa. Supported
by my material essence, I cause this entire system of existing
things to emanate again and again, without any power of
their own, by the power of the material essence. Nor do
these actions implicate me,? O despiser of wealth! me who
remain tranquil, as one unconcerned. by them, and not inter-
ested by these actions. Under my superintendence, nature
produces moveable and immoveable things.!° By this means,"
O son of Kunti! does the world revolve. The deluded
despise me, when invested with a human form, not under-
standing my high existence,* which is the lord of all things,
—vain in their hopes,'’ their actions,!‘ and their knowledge ;'>

7 Téyu, ‘wind,’ is used in philosophical language for ‘atmosphere,’ distinct
from didsha, "the ether a subtile fluid supposed tf pervade all’space, - While
dkdsha is supposed to be perfectly immoveuble and existing everywhere, air is
always moving, and penetrates only where it can effect an entrance. The two
words stand in almost the same relation as our wind and air, with the exception
that they are distinct substances, and that dkdsia is not merely atmospheric air,
but that’ whrich fills all infinity, -

® A day of Brahm& (sec Chapter VIII. note 19}. It may be useful here to
remark that the oifly word existing in Sanskrit to convey the idea of creation by
God, has the literal meaning of ‘emit,’ *cause to come forth, or emanate ;* ani
this, too, in the oldest Sanskrit works. May we not receive this fact as evidence
of the antiquity of the belicf that the Creator was the material as well as the
efficient cause of the creation, and of the philosophic bias of the Aryan mind even
at a very early period ?

* Tu Chapter VIII. shloka 4, he has mentioned that the action of the Supreme
Being was the creation and the dissolution of matter. But it has also been said
that all action, except what is undertaken with d-votion, etc., implicates the actor,
entails upon him their good or evil results. He now states that he himself cannot be
liuble to these restrictions, since he acts without interest or concern in what he does.

10 Animate and inanimate matter.

11 By my superintendence of the work of nature.

12 Those who are deluded by the appearance of the universe, and the action of
the three quglities, despise mo, the Supreme Spirit, when I descend to earth
in the form of Krishna; for they do know my real character, superior to and
monarch of all.

13 Sineo these hopes are not of final emancipation, but of garthly, or at best
heavenly, enjoyments. .

1 Since they are undertaken with interested motives.

1 Since they beliove matter supreme, and do not know the truth of things.

12



===== PAGE 203 / 300 =====

64 BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE NINTH.

devoid of reflection, and inclining to the deluded nature
of the Asuras'6 and Rékshasas. But the high-minded,
inclining to the nature of the gods,’ worship me with their
hearts turned to no other object, knowing me to be the
imperishable principle of all things. Always glorifying me
and striving with unbroken vows, and prostrating themselves
before me, they worship me, constant in devotion. Others
also, offering the sacrifice of knowledge,® worship me, who
am present everywhere in divers forms, by means of my
singleness and separability.!2 I am the immolation. I am
the whole sacrificial rite. I am the libation offered to
ancestors. I am the drug. I am the incantation. I am
the sacrificial butter also. Iam the fire. I am the incense.
I am the father, the mother,?! the sustainer, the grandfather *
of this universe,—the mystic doctrine, the purification, the
syllable “Om!”%—the Rich-, the Saman-, and also the
Yajur-, Veda,—the path, the supporter, the master, the
witness,® the habitation, the refuge, the friend, the origin,

© See Chapter VII. note 18.

1 In the Devas, the quality of goodness and light /sattica) predominates.

18 Recognizing me in every object of worship, from a complete’ knowledge
of my true nature: Compare Manu iv. 24. '

19 My single nature as the one Supreme Being, and my power of separate
existence in the different deities, ete. I have rendered these words, as if the
were explanations of risiayatomukham. ‘They might, however, be construed as if
governed by wpvaate, and refering to the «liferent characters, under which the

ity was actually worshipped. Galanos has adopted this method, though I can
scarcely say, judiciously.

2 Galanos (hough on what anthorty T know not) distinguishes betmeen frat
and yajna, making the former a ‘bloody,’ the latter a * bloodless” sacrifice.

2 Father and mother of matter, as being both efficient and material cause. See
notes 4 and 5 supra.

2) Grandfather was a name which inspired reverence and affectiqn in the Hindé
grandchild.

23 This triad would seem to include all religion, whether practical or doctrinal.
Vedyam, in the first case, would be theological study and belief; pavitram would
include all the practice of religion, whether sacrifice, mortification, ete.; and
onkdra, would comprehend prayer and praise. In the sccond ease the three words
would represent the theology, the injunetions for practice, and the hymne and
prayers of the Vodes.,

* Bupply ‘ of the universe,’ to ead
by which mortals obtain final emancipat

% Being gifted with the power of om

the words in this shloka. He is the path



===== PAGE 204 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF KINGLY KNOWLEDGE AND MysTERY. 65

the dissolution,® the place, the receptacle,” the inexhaustible
seed.”® I heat (the world). I withhold and pour out the
rain. I am ambrosia% and death, the existing and the non-
existing. Those who know the three Vedas,*! who drink
the Soma, who purify themselves from sin, and offer sacrifices,
implore of me the attainment of heaven: these, obtaining as
their teward the world of the holy Indra, eat in heaven the
divine food of the gods. Having enjoyed this great world
of heaven, they re-enter the world of mortals, when the
reward is exhausted. Following in this manner the law of
the Vedas, they indulge in their desires, and obtain a happi-
ness which comes and goes. I bear the responsibility™ of the
happiness of those men, who, constant in devotion, worship
me, meditating on me, and having no other object. And
even those also who devotedly worship other gods with the
gift of faith, worship me, too, O son of Kunti! but not pro-
perly.® For I am the devourer and lord also of all sacrifices ;
but they do not understand me truly, therefore they fall.%*
Those who devote themselves to the gods, go to the gods;
those who do s0 to the Pitris, go to the Pitris. The worshippers

2% The cause ofemanation and re-nbsorption.

7 As being the material essence, into which all things are absorbed finally.

%* Having already identified nature, or the material essence, with himself,
as we have seen.

2 Those who worship me obtain immortality, even as those do who eat of
ambrosia.

% That which has, and that which has not a real existence, é.e. spirit and matter.
He merely sums up all that he has declared himself to be, and says in two words,
‘Tam both all spirit and all matter.’ The scholiasts, however, explain sad by
vyakta, ‘developed matter,’ and asad by aryakta, * non-developed matter.’ Comp.
XI. 37; and XII. 12.

1 Our auther does not, in this, condemn the established faith, or the Vedas; or _
deny the propriety of religious rites; but only condemns the spirit in which those
who rely on them, prosecute them; namely, in the hope of heavenly enjoymenta.

% Enjoy their pleasures.

38 Their sojourn in heaven, though very long, according to their merits, is
finite; and at ite conclusion they are born again on earth.

% Lit, ‘The insurance,’ vide Chap. IT. note 43. .e

% Since the gods are imporsonifications of cach of my attributes: but they
ought to worship me as a whole.

8 From hoaven, and are born again on earth.


===== PAGE 205 / 300 =====

66 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE NINTH.

of the Bhitas go to the Bhiitas. Only my worshippers come to
me. If any one offer me a leaf, a flower, fruit or water,” with
devotional intention, I eat it, thus piously offered by one of
devoted mind. Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest,
whatever thou sacrificest, whatever thou givest away, whatever
mortification thou performest, O son of Kunt{! that do as an
offering to me. Thus thou shalt be freed from the bonds of
action, which are the good and bad results (of actions), and
if thou be devoted to devotion and renunciation, when dis-
charged (from the body), thou wilt come to me. I am the
same to all beings. I have neither foe nor friend. But those
who worship me with devotion, dwell in me and I also in
them. Even if one who has led a very bad life worship me,
devoted to no other object, he must be considered as a good
man ;“° for he has judged aright. He soon becomes religiously
disposed, and enters eternal rest. Rest assured, O son of
Kunti! that he who worships me, never perishes. For even
those who are born in sin‘'—cven women, Vaishyas and

ere mentioned may be contrasted with the
as the Ashwa-media, which were made to
the deities. ‘Tho victim, says Ki is nothing, but the spirit in which it
is offered—the disinterestedness of the sacrificer. ‘

38 That is, accept it, since the deities were supposed, originally, to devour the
offerings made, and this word is therefore used in the sense of aecept. Of course
the Supreme Spirit could not be supposed to cat, even by the most materially-
inclined philosophers.

% The very commonest actions of life may be looked upon as sacrifices to
the Supreme Being, if performed without interestedness and in a devotionalespirit.

«© His former bad life must be forgotten, and his presont devotion wipes
it all out.

4 The offspring, probably, of illicit marriages, of thoso between different castes,
ete. Or perhaps a general term for all but the privileged Aryans, including all
foreigners, ete.

49 The fair sex has fared as ill in India as in many other parts,of the world,
where man, who owes all to her, has ungratefully cast her physical weakness
in her face, and has gone so far as to declare her unfit for Heaven, It is casy to
account for this shameful conduct, as for many other peculiarities of Eastern
character, by the heat of the climate, which deprives women of tke exclusive
esteem, and the halo of superiority which surrounds her beneath less enervating
and passionate skies; und by the warlike habits and ideas of theso nations who
rere wont to despig ll that wax physically weak. “But even in the drama, which
flourished at « much more civilized period (about our own cra), the ladies are not
supposed competent to speak the same language even as their husbands, but, with
slaves and outeasts, must be content to lisp their loves in the softer tones of the
Prakyit dialect,

3 The simplicity of the offerings
pomp and expense of such sacri



===== PAGE 206 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY MEANS OF KINGLY KNOWLEDGE AND MYSTERY, 67

Shidras “—take the highest path, if they have recourse to me.
How much more, then, sacred Bréhmans and pious Réjarshis.
Worship me by obtaining this finite and wretched world.
Place thy heart on me, worshipping me, sacrificing to me,
saluting me. Thus shalt thou come to me, if thou thus
devotest thyself, intent on me.’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Ninth Chapter,
by name

‘DEVOTION BY MEANS OF KINGLY KNOWLEDGE AND KINGLY
MYSTERY.’

“5 That tho Shidras, slaves, and probably, too, descendants of the conquered
aborigines, should be denied 'a place in heaven by tho imperious Brahman,
astonishes us but little; but that the same fate should attend the Vaishya—the
merchant caste—who were dignified with the Brahmanical thread, and undoubted!
belonged to the Aryan race, is a significant fact, which marks the period at whi
our poet wrote. ‘The struggle had hitherto been between Bréhman and Kshatriya
—church and stato—and, as must have resulted from the meditative character of
the HindG, the former had triumphed. ‘The Kshatriya had consented to receive
his laws, a3 well as his religion, from the Brahman, and even an alliance, offensive
and defensive, was mutually agreed on, both uniting to turn the channel of their
animosities against the people. ‘The “bourgeoisie” were growing powerful by
their wealth and the Shidras impatient of oppression. Knowledge and phi-
losophy found its way out of the exclusive, but now leaky schools of the Brahman ;
and the Vaishya learnt from the latter the real equality of all men. When at
length the revolution of Buddha broke out, the Brahman compelled the warrior-
caste to jain him against the bulk of the populace, and their united weight obliged
the latter to succumb. From that time, the Vaishya was denied the privilege of
heaven, and henge, among other reasons, it may be inferred that this poem was
composed after the rise of Buddhism,

Derived from rdjan ‘a king,’ and righi ‘a pious personage” “ Half kings
half saint.” See Indez, under * Rishi.” The allusion is hero a lymp of sugar
thrust down the Kehatriya’s throat.

4 As usual, Krishna closes the chapter with a reiteration of the exhortation to
fight, and brings it in with his wonted dexterity. He has said that every action
of life should be made’ sacrifee to the Supreme Being, and he now bids him
undertake even fighting with the same object.



===== PAGE 207 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE TENTH.

.
THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Listen even further, O strong-armed one! to my impor-
tant words, which I will proclaim to thee, whom I love,! from
a desire for thy good. Neither the multitude of the Suras
know my origin, nor yet the Maharshis,? for I am the origin
of all gods and of all the Maharshis. He among mortals who
knows that I, the great Lord of the world, have had neither
birth nor beginning, is not confounded by error, and is
liberated from all his sins.3 Intelligence, spiritual know-
ledge, absence of error, patience, truth, temperance, tranquil-
lity, pleasure, pain, birth, death, danger, and also security ;—
innocence, equanimity, satisfaction, mortification, almsgiving,
glory and ignominy ; are the dispositions of beings, severally
derived from me alone. The seven Maharshis,‘ and the four
Ancients,’ and the Manus, partaking of my ex{stence, were
born by my mind,’ and from them these inhabitants of the

.

1 Priyamdna is the pass. part. pres. of pri ‘to love,’ but the passive of this
verb having algo the sense of ‘to be delighted,’ etc., Schlegel and Wilkins have
given it a middle foree; Galanos supports me in what seems to be the simplest
and most natural mode of rendering this word. :

2 See Index, under ‘Rishi.’ The name is here given (sce shloka 6) to the
seven Prajdpatis, or progenitors of mankind.

2 Belief in the eternity, ete., of the Supreme Being, is a means of eaancipation,
‘The reader will have observed, already, that this is the constant formula for
establishing any dogma put forward.

« These must be the same as the Prajapatis, or progenitors of mankind, sprung
from Brahmé’s brain. They are, however, generally said to be ten if number.
See Index, under ‘Rishi’ and ‘ Prajipati.”

5 The four Kuméras, or sons of Brahma and companions of Vishpu. Their
names are Sanatkuméra, Sanaka, San/itana, and Sanandana.

* See Indes.

7 They were fabled to be sprung from Brahmé’s brain, whon he was reflecting
how to people the universe.



===== PAGE 208 / 300 =====

DEVOTION To THE DIVINE VIRTUES. 69

world are sprung. He who truly comprehends this pre-
eminence ® and mystic faculty of mine, is gifted with unshaken
devotion ; there is no doubt about that. I am the origin of
all. From me all proceeds. Believing me to be thus, the
wise, gifted with meditative powers, worship me. Thinking
on me, dead in me,!° teaching one another, and constantly
telling of me, they are both satisfied and delighted. To them
who are constantly devoted, and worship me according to (the
ordinances of) love, I give that mental devotion, by means of
which they eventually come tome. For them only do I, on
account of my compassion, remaining in my own condition,!"
destroy the darkness which springs from ignorance by the
brilliant lamp of spiritual knowledge.’

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘Thou art the Supreme Universal Spirit, the Supreme
dwelling, the most excellent purification. The Eternal
Person, divine, prior to the gods, unborn, omnipresent, all
the Rishis declare thee to be, and the Devarshi® Nérada,
Asita, Devala, and the Vydsa,'* and thou wilt also tell me

® Tho word vidhiti, besides the usual meaning of ‘ pre-cminence, mastership,’
which may be uged here, has a peculiar philosophical one, which we find in
shlokas 16 and 19, and elscwhere, It signifies some individual manifestation
of the universality of the Supreme Being in all things, but especially in the first
and best of all classos and collections of things and beings.” In the language
of Patanjali, and in other philosophical works, it again denotes a number of
supernatural’ powers generally attributed to Shiva, but capable of being acquired
by man by mcans of austerc devotion. They aro cight in number, such as
“extreme minuteness,’ ‘illimitable bulk,’ ote.

® The universe.

10 Dead to the world, absorbed in me. Schlegel, however, translates ‘me quasi

irantes,’ which is not justified by the usual meaning of gata-prina, and does not
give any clue to the sense,

1 To othefs I manifest mysclf in divers forms, quitting my own individuality
to become one or other of the gods. To the devotee, however, I disclose my real
nature, and thus remove that ignorance in his mind which prevented him from
recognizing my true universality,

12 That within which all the univorse exists,

18 Compare VIII. note 1, and XI. 88.

\ In the hymns of the Vedas, which aro each ascribed to ope of the Righis,

5 Seo Index under ‘ Rishi.’ :

18 We have prefixed the definite article here, because Vyasa is not a proper
name, but a title. See Index. It is hore used par excellence to designate Krighna _


===== PAGE 209 / 300 =====

70 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE TENTH.

thyself too, Everything that thou tellest me, O Hairy One!
I believe to be true; for neither the gods nor Dénavas!” com-
‘prehend thy manifestation,!* O Holy One! Thou thyself only
knowest thyself by thyself, O Supreme Person! Creator and
Lord of all that exists! God of Gods! Lord of the Universe!
For thou shouldest completely declare thine own divine vir-
tues,” by means of which thou hast pervaded ang continuest
to pervade*! these worlds. How shall I know thee, O mystic
one! ever considering thee in all points of view? In what
particular forms of existence should I contemplate thee, O
Holy One? Relate further at full length thine own magic
power and virtue,*? O thou who art besought by mortals!
for I am never sated of devouring this ambrosia through
mine ears.’?

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘ Well then,** I will relate to thee my own divine virtues,”
at least the principal ones, O best of Kurus! for there is no
end to my extensiveness, I am the soul, O Arjuna! which

Dwaipiyana, the last of the twenty-eight Vyfsas, to whom are ascribed the com-
pilation of the Vedas, the composition of many other works, andeparticularly that
of the Mah&bhtrata, the great Indian epic.

1 Here a general name for all the enemies of the gods, demons, giants, ete.

1® Neither gods nor demons, much less men, comprehend thy power of appear-
ing in a manifest form as a deity, ete., or as the chief and best in every collection
of things.

W All the translators have taken the more physical view, and translated this
compound by *best of men,’ which, independently of its weakness, is a title very
unlikely to be given to Krishna by Arjuna, at the very moment when he is
speaking of him in his most umaterial and superhuman character. Compare

Mhapter VIII, note 1, under adhidaiva, and Chapter XV. 18 and 19.

20 See note 8. .

31 When tho verb thd is used with an indefinite participle, it has generally the
force of ‘ continuance, remaining”

% This is the force of the prep. pari in parichintayan, ‘how sball'I discover
thee in every object of the universe ?*

% Krighna’s words, which gave immortality to those who received them with
devotion, are justly qpmpared to ambrosie, and Arjuna’s ears, through which he
drinks them in, to the mouth which devours it.

‘% Hanta is merely inceptive, and shows that the narrator takes breath before
he begins a long end important relation,


===== PAGE 210 / 300 =====

DEVOTION TO THE DIVINE VIRTUES. 71

exists in the heart® of all beings,** and I am the beginning
and the middle, and also the end,” of existing things2¢
Among the Adityas, I am Vishnu.* Among luminous bodies,
Iam the beaming sun. I am Marichi among the Maruts;
among lunar mansions, I am the mansion of the moon. Of
the Vedas I am the SAma-veda. Among the inferior gods, I
am Vésaya;* and among senses, I am the heart.s! Among
material principles,” I am intellect; and among the Rudras,
Iam Shankara.* Kuvera, among Yakghas and Rakshasas ;*
and among Vasus, I am fire; Meru, among mountain-peaks.
And know, O son of Prithé! that I am Vrihaspati,® the
chief of household priests. Among generals, I am Skanda.%
Among pieces of water, the ocean. Among Maharshis,*? I am
Bhrigu. Among words, the monosyllable “Om!” Among
forms of worship, the silent worship.* Among mountain
ranges, Himdlaya. The sacred fig-tree® among all trees;

% Lit, ‘receptacle,’ but here put briefly for raktdshaya, ‘the receptacle of the
blood.’ "The heart was deomed by Hind philosophers to be the seat of the soul,
and these words are so far important, that they establish the doctrine of the identi-
fication of the Deity with the individual soul.

26 Tt may here be remarked as it should, perhaps, have been before, that Dhita,
when a substantive, may mean cither an animate or an inanimate object.

2 Speaking .of himsclf as identified with the material essenco, from which
materials emanate, to which they ure re-ubsorbed, and which, as vital essence,
supports and sustains thom while they exist.

2 Not tho superior deity, the second person in my theological triad, but simply
one of the Adityas themselves, considered as their chief. Seo Inder.

29 The asterisms through which the moon passes aro commonly considered to
be twenty-seven in number.

30 Indra, the chief of the Devas. Sve Index.

3 Manas, the heart, was considered as an eleventh or internal sense, and the
collector and director of the other ten.

% Lit., ‘existing things.” The categories of developed matter /oyakta) are
twenty-thre in number, and intellect is the first of them, and naturally superior
to the others.

33 A name of Shiva, as chief of the Rudras.

™ ‘Theao gonii being the guardians of the treasures of the god of wealth.

% He being charged with the clerical affairs of the gods. Seo Index.

% The god of war. Sec Index.

37 See Index under ‘Rishi.’ .*

%® Muttering prayers and passages of tho Vodus in an inaudible tone.

%® The Banyan or Ficus Religiosa (Ashwattha/, the falling branches of which
take root in the earth, It abounds in great quantities in parts of India, and wo


===== PAGE 211 / 300 =====

72 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE TENTH.

and among Devarghis,” Nérada. Among Gandharvas, Chitra-
ratha. Among the perfect,“ Kapila, the Muni. Know that
among horses I am Uchchaishshravasa, sprung from am-
brosia ;*! Airdvata among elephants, and among men, the
king. I am the thunderbolt‘? among weapons; among cows,
Kémaduk. And I am the procreator, Kandarpa. Among
serpents, I am Vasuki. And I am Ananta among Niégas;
Varuna, among inhabitants of the water.‘! And among the
Pitris I am Aryaman ; Yama,“ among correctors. And I am
Prahlada among the Daityas; Time among things which
count. And among animals, I am the lion; and Vainateya
among birds. I am the wind among purifiers; Rama‘ among
soldiers. And among fishes I am the Makara. I am the
Ganges among rivers. And of creations I am the beginning,
the end, and the middle, Arjuna!; the knowledge of the
Adhy&tma,7 among sciences, and (human) speech, among
sounds of utterance. And I am the letter A‘ among letters,
the combination itself of a compound word. I am also eternal
time. I am the preserver who watches in all directions. And
I am Death, who seizes all, and the Birth of those who are to
be ;—Fame, Fortune and Speech, Memory, Meditation, Per-

may account for its sanctification, partly from the shade it affords from an Tndian
sun being greater and better than that of any other tree, partly that its peculiar
growth would constitute an emblem of eternity. Compare Chapter XV.

40 Siddha is also the name of @ particular class of demigods (see Indez), but I
do not think that Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya sytem, could be rightly
ranked among them, as in that case we might exclaim, * Physician, heal thyself,’
and wonder why his would-be infallible prescription for final emancipation had
failed to liberate himself.

4 Being one of the fourteen articles produced by the churning of the great
ocean by the gods and demons, for ambrosia; for account of which, sce Indes,
under ¢ Vighnu."

4 The weapon of Indra, the Jupiter Tonans of the West.

4 The cow of plenty, corresponding to the Greek Amalthea.

 Lit., ‘water animals,’ among which Varuna, the Iindé Nepturla, would
scarcely like to be ranked.

4 The judge of the dead.

“ Dasharatha Rémé, the hero of the Indian Iliad, the Ramayana, and con-
queror of Ravana and his followers, the Daityas. See Index.

4 Bee Chapter VIII. note 1.

“48 Because it is the concomitant part of all consonants and diphthongs.


===== PAGE 212 / 300 =====

DEVOTION TO THE DIVINE VIRTUES, 73

severance and Patience among feminine words. I am the
Vyihate&man among the hymns“ (of the Séma-Veda) ; the
Géyatri among rhymes. Among months I am Marga-
shirgha ; among seasons, the flowery spring.*' I am the
game of dice among things which deceive; splendour itself
among splendid things, I am victory; I am perseverance.
I am the goodness of the good.” Among the descendants of
Vrishni, I am Vasudeva ;* among the Péndavas, Arjuna.
Among Munis also, I am the Vydsa; among poets,> the
poet Ushanas. The rod among tamers am I; I am polity,
among means of victory. And I am silence too among
mysteries ;* the knowledge of the wise. And I am that
which is the seed of all existing things, O Arjuna! There
exists no one thing, moveable or immoveable,® which is
without me. There is no end of my divine virtues, O harasser
of thy foes; but I have made this extended narration of my
pre-eminence by way of instance. Whatever is pre-eminent,
or the essence (of any thing), fortunate or mighty also; do
thou understand, in truth, to be sprung from part of my

© Saman is the name for the hymns of the Sima-veda, of which the Vyihat-
sfman is a portion.

8% Novomber-Decomber. It is considered the chief of the months, probably
because the year began with it at that period. ‘This, its other name, Agrahdyana,
“the first of the year,’ would seom to indicate. ‘The HindG year now begins with
the month Vaishkha, April-May.

‘1 ‘This season, commouly called Vasanta, is comprised in the months Chaitra
and Vaishakhu, or from middle of March to that of May. It is the first of the six
seasons of the Hindd year, the others being—

2. Grishma, heat, Jasisbta-Ashihe, Mids May to mid. July.

3. Varghés, the rains, Shrivana-Bhadra, Mid. July to mid, Soptember.

4. Sharad,’ autumn,” Ashwina-Kartika, Mid. September to mid. Novemb.
6. Hemanta, snow, | Agrahayana-Pausha, Mid. November to mid. January.
6. Shishira,” frost, Magha-Phalguna, " Mid. January to mid. March.

#2 Schlegel bas ‘ vigor vigentium.”

83 A name of Krishna (seo Indez). These are little compliments, en passant,
to his own"und his hearer’s superiority. :

4 Seo Note 16.

55 Rather learned preceptors, teachers of precepts, than matrical composers.

6 Lit, ‘secrets.’ Silence, sinco it explains nothing," is’ often a very great
mystery, which cannot be fathomed.

7 Nature, undeveloped matter, the material essence (praky

68 Animate and inanimate,



===== PAGE 213 / 300 =====

4 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE TENTH,

energy. But what, indeed, hast thou to do, Arjuna, with so
much knowledge as all this? (One sentence comprehends it
all, viz.:) I have established, and continue to establish, all
this universe by one portion of myself’?
Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Tenth Chapter,
by name
‘DEVOTION TO THE DIVINE VIRTUES.’

5 By prakriti, the material essence, which, as wo have seen, is the material
part of the Supreme Being. This translation gives, I believe, a better sense
to the whole sentence, and a truer rendering of the construction with sthite and a
participle Schlegel has ‘integer mansi.” Wilkins and Galanos are not near
the mark,


===== PAGE 214 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘My delusion has been dispersed by the words which thou
hast spoken for my good, (concerning) that highest mystery
called the Adhydtma.! For I have heard at full length from
thee, O thou whése eyes are like lotus-leaves! the origin and
dissolution of existing things, and also thy inexhaustible
greatness.’ I desire, O highest Lord! to behold thy sovereign
form, even as thou hast thus declared thyself to be, O best of
men! If thou thinkest that that form is possible for me to
look upon, master! do thou, Lord of Devotion! show thine
inexhaustible self to me.’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

“Behold my forms, O son of Prithé! in hundreds and
thousands, of divers kinds, heavenly, and of divers colours
and fashions. Behold Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, the twin

1 See Chapter VIII, note 1.

2 Mahdtmya cannot be here reecived in its usual signification of ‘magnanimity,
which would yicld no satisfactory sense. It 1s explained by the word aryaya,
which follows it, and refers to his boundless universality, of which Krishna
has just given eo many instances.

3It is strange, that after declaring the infinity and universality of the Deity,
our philosopher should seck to invest him in a'palpable bodily ‘form, however
superhumgn and un-material. But we fancy that in this he has yielded partly to
the poet, and partly to the man of sense and crafty schismatic, who knew that if
his deity was to be well received by the public, he must wear some form or other,
on which.the less spiritual part of it could meditate with ease and awe, but
without fatiguing the thought. Moreover, the descrip n itself of the transfigura-
tion, indicates that it was merely an attempt to a jolize the universality, omni-
presence, and creative and destructive nature of the deity, and to unite the whole
‘with the characteristics of Vishnu.


===== PAGE 215 / 300 =====

76 BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

Ashwinau, and the Maruts. Behold many wonders, which
thou hast never seen before, son of Bharata! Here in my
body now behold the whole universe in a collective form,
with moveable and immoveable* objects, and whatever else
thou wouldest behold, Krishna!> But thou wilt not be able
to behold me merely with this (human).eye of thine. I give
thee a divine eye. Behold my sovereign mystery.’

SANJAYA SPOKE.

‘Having thus spoken, O king!® Hari,’ the mighty lord of
devotion, showed to the son of Prith& his sovereign form,
gifted with many mouths® and eyes,’ with many wonderful
appearances, with many divine ornaments,’ holding many
celestial weapons,"! wearing celestial wreaths" and robes,"
anointed with celestial perfumes, the all-miraculous infinite
deity, with his face turned in all directions, If the light of
a thousand suns were to break forth in the sky at the same
time, it would be similar to the brilliance of that mighty one.
There did the son of Pandu then behold the whole universe,
so multifuriously distributed, collected in one in the person of
the god of gods. Thereupon the despiser of wealth, struck
with amazement, and with his hair standing on end, saluted
the god by bowing his head, folded his hands reverentially,'?
and spoke as follows :’

* Animate and inanimate.

© See Chapter I. note 18.

© This is addressed to Dhritarashtra.

7 A name of Vishnu and Krishna. See Inder.

* As will be scen afterwards, these mouths, filled with flames, were typical
of the material essence /prakriti), in which all ‘things are re-absorbed, and thus,
as it were, destroyed.

2 Typical of his power of secing everything. ‘

1 Wearing the peculiar wonders and ornaments of cach deity, typical of his
possessing all the peculiar powers and attributes of each,

1 The weapons, wyeaths, and dresses peculiar to each of the deities.

12 This is done by plating the hands together, hollowing the palms so as to
hold water, and carrying them in this position to the forehead. This is the usual
reverence of inferiors of respectability to their superiors.


===== PAGE 216 / 300 =====

THE VISION OF THE UNIVERSAL FORM. 17

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘13 behold all the gods in thy body, O god! and crowds
of different beings, the lord Brahmé on a throne of a lotus-
cup, and all the Rishis and celestial serpents. I see thee with
many arms,! stomachs,’ mouths, and eyes, everywhere of
infinite form. I see neither end, nor middle, nor yet begin-
ning of thee, O Lord of All! of the form of All!}® crowned
with a diadem, bearing a club, and a discus.!7 I see thee, a
mass of light, beaming everywhere, hard to look upon; bright
as a kindled fire or the sun, on all sides, immeasurable.
I believe thee to be the indivisible, the highest object of
knowledge, the supreme receptacle'® of this universe, the
imperishable preserver of eternal law, the everlasting person.!®
I see thee without beginning, middle or end, of infinite
strength, with the sun and moon as eyes, mouths like a
Kindled fire, heating all the universe with thy splendour. For
this space between heaven and earth,” and every quarter of
heaven, are pervaded by thee alone. The triple world is
astounded, O mighty one! having beheld this miraculous and
terrific form of thine. For these crowds of Suras turn to thee
(as their refuge). Some, affrighted, murmur with folded hands.

13 We may here remark that the poct has shown great taste and judgment in
pacing the details of the appearance in the mouth of Arjuna, and not of Sanjaya.
it gives the description more force, and enables him to mark the increasing awe
of the spectator ; concluding with a prayer for mercy, of much beauty. ‘The con-
ception af the whole passage renders it, perhaps, the finest in the Sansknt
language. The change of metre, too, from the common Anushtubh to Trishtubh,
lends additional spirit to the whole.

4 Typical of his infinite strength and power

1 Typical of his power of containing and comprehending all things.

16 Whose form is the universe,

1 Typical of his power of incarnation,—the club, the discus, and the tiara being
the insignia of Krishna: compare shloka 46. The discus is a warlike missile
in the shape of a gueity but that of Krishna has the additional advantage of being
surrounded with flames ; and with it accordingly he sct on fire and destroyed the
city of Késhi (Benares}, when engaged in the war against the Daityas under
Kansa.

18 ‘The material essence, into which all matter was re-absorbed, being a portion
of the Supreme Being. oe

® See Chapter VIII. note 1, under ‘ Adhidatva,’

% ‘The air, in which the transfiguration appeared.


===== PAGE 217 / 300 =====

78 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

The multitudes of Maharshis*! and Siddhas praise thee in
most excellent hymns, crying “Hail to thee!” Rudras,
Xdityas, Vasus, and all the S&dhyas, Vishwas, the twin
Ashwinau, and Maruts and Ushmapds, the crowds of
Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras, and Siddhas behold thee, and
are all amazed. Having seen thy mighty form, with many
mouths and eyes, O great-armed one! and with many arms,
thighs, and feet, many stomachs and many projecting teeth,
the worlds* and I, too, are astounded. For, since I have seen
thee, touching the skies (in height), beaming with divers
colours, with open mouth, and huge glittering eyes, my
inmost soul is troubled, and I lose both®! my firmness and
tranquillity, O Vishnu! I cease to recognize the regions of
heaven,” and experience no joy, merely from beholding thy
mouths with their projecting teeth, like the fire of death. Be
merciful, O Lord of gods! habitation of the universe! and all
these sons of Dhritardshtra, together with multitudes of the
kings of the earth, Bhishma, Drona, and yon son of a
charioteer,”> together with our principal warriors also,—
hasten to enter thy mouths,” formidable with projecting
teeth. Some are seen clinging in the interstices between thy
teeth, with their heads ground down. As many torrents of
rivers flow down direct * even to the ocean, these heroes of
the human race enter thy flaming mouths. As flies, carried
away by a strong impetus, fly into a lighted candle to their
own destruction, even multitudes (of beings), impelled by

1 See Index, under ‘ Rishi.’

2% Expressed by the relative pronoun ye: lit the Sdhyas whatever.

23 The three worlds—heaven, earth, and hell.

2% Literally, ‘I find neither,’ ete.

25 «T lose my senses, and do not know where I am.’ The regions of heaven are
the points of the compass. ‘

%© Karna. See Index.

¥ Will speedily do so. Speaking prophetically of their death, 80 soon to
follow. Their entrance in, the mouths of the Supreme Being is typical only of the
dissolution of their bodies, not of their souls; the re-absorption of the material
body into the material essence (prakriti).

«7 Even from their sources they take the direction of the ocean,


===== PAGE 218 / 300 =====

THE VISION OF THE UNIVERSAL FORM. 79

a strong impetus, enter thy mouths also for destruction.”
Devouring all inhabitants of the world from every quarter,
thou lickest them in thy flaming lips. Filling the whole
universe with thy splendour, thy sharp beams burn, O
Vishnu!® Tell me who thou art, of awful form. Salutation
to thee, O best of gods! Be merciful! I desire to know thee,
the primeval one, for I cannot divine what thou art about.’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Iam Death,” that causes the destruction of mankind,
(already) mature. I am come hither to destroy mankind.
Not one,®* except thee, of the warriors, who are here drawn
up in their respective armies,‘ will survive.» Therefore do
thou arise and seize glory! Conquer thy foes and enjoy the
ample kingdom. I also have already slain these enemies.”
Be thou only the instrument, O left-handed® one! Slay
Drona, and Bhishma, and Jayadratha, Karna and others too,
strong in war, who are (really) slain by me. Be not
troubled !*° Fight, thou wilt conquer thy rivals‘ in the fray.’

2 They rush headlong into battle, as moths fly into the flame.

% Hero, and in shloka 24, we find Vishnu addressed, and not Krishna, The
change of,form was not merely to that of the Supreme Spirit, but firstly from the
earthly body of Krishna, the incarnation, to the typical one of Vishnu, and then
to the personified, appearance of the universal energy.

3 Lit. ‘thy action” Arjuna is alarmed at seeing all these warriors thus
devoured in effigy, as it were, and wants to know what it all means.

3? I nsk this translation, though it is not supported by any of the translators,
who have all ‘Time,’ (Schlegel, * Dies,") as being the only one which will render
the sense of the passage clear, and supported by all that is said before and after it.

39 Lit., ‘not all,” which, in Sanskrit, is equivalent to our ‘not any.’

% Lit., ‘in the hostile armies,’ alluding to both.

® This prophecy is not quite correct. The Mahabhfrata tells us that all
perished on either side except the five sons of Pandu,

% Of Hastinapura, about which they wore going to fight.

37 As Krishna has already told us, in Chapter II. one man does not really kill
another. He kills and has killed the Dhartar4shtras in determination, Arjuna is
only the instrum

38 From eavya, ‘left,’ and sdchin, which only occurs in this compound. It is
probably derived from a theoretical root, each, ‘to curve or bend,’ and the com-
pound would mean, ‘bending the bow with the left hand.’ See Westergaard’s
* Radices Lingum Sanskrite,’ p. 104, .

This is the 2nd person of the 3rd preterite without thé augment, which, with
id, is constantly used as an imperative. (See Wilson’s Grammar, pp. 805, 6.)
The final visarga is droped before the semi-vowel in the next half-line,
«© Rivals for the possession of Dhritarghtra’s kingdom.

13


===== PAGE 219 / 300 =====

80 BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH,

SANJAYA SPOKE.

‘Having heard these words of the hairy one, he of the
tiara," with his hands folded in supplication, and trembling,
again saluted‘? Krishna and.addressed him, bending with
@ low murmur, overwhelmed with fear.’

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘The universe, O Krishna!‘ is justly delighted with thy
glory, and devoted to thee. The Raékghasas flee, affrighted,
to the divers quarters of heaven, and all the multitudes of
the Siddhas salute thee. And, indeed, why should they not
adore thee, O great one! theo, the first creator, more im-
portant even than Brahmé himself? O infinite king of
gods! habitation of the universe! thou art the one indivisible,
the existing and not existing, that which is supreme,"
Thou art the first of the gods, the most ancient person. Thou
art the supreme receptacle of this universe. Thou knowest
all, and mayest be known, and art the supreme mansion. By
thee is this universe caused to emanate, O thou of endless
forms! Air, Yama, fire, Varuna, the moon, the progenitor,
and the great- grandfather (of the world) art thou., Hail!
hail to thee! hail to thee a thousand times! and again, yet
again, hail! hail to thee! Hail to thee from before! Hail to
thee from behind! Hail to thce from all sides too! Thou

0 Arjuna.
© Namaskritwa, irregular for namaskritya, on account of the metre. Schlegel
thinks that the rule, wiuch roquires the termination ya for twa in indeclinable
participles of compound verbs, holds good only for those compounded re-
po not for those with other particles. ‘The grammarians are chief silent
on this point.
«3 See Chapter I, note 18.

4 Since Brahms, the impersonification of the creative poer of the Supreme
Being, is, at best, a mere perishable, material deity.

«= Spirit and matter. See Chapter IX. note 30.

45 ‘The translatiqn of this passage has been much disputed; but as it would
rather perplex than erflighten the reader to repeat the arguments used on both
sides, we must refer him to the critique of Langlois in the ‘Journal Asatiquo,”
vol. vi, 1825, p. 249, and Lassen’s reply in a note on this passage. Compare,

* moreover, Ch. IX. shloka 19, and Chapter XIII. shloka 12.



===== PAGE 220 / 300 =====

THE VISION OF THE UNIVERSAL FORM. 81

All! Of infinite power and immense might, thou compre-
hendest all; therefore thou art All!” As I took thee merely
for a friend,® I beseech thee without measure to pardon
whatever I may, in ignorance of this thy greatness, have said
from negligence or affection, such as, “O Krishna! O son of
Yadu! O friend!” and everything in-which I may have
treated thee in a joking manner, in recreation, repose, sitting,
or meals, “whether in private or in the presence of these,
Eternal One! Thou art the father of the animate and in-
animate world. Thou art to be honoured as more important
than that Guru himself.!? There is none equal to thee, and
how could there be another superior (to thee) even in the
triple world, O thou of unrivalled power? Therefore I
implore thee, saluting thee and prostrating my body; thee,
the Lord, worthy of praises. Thou shouldest bear with me,
O god! as a fathcr with a son, as a friend with a friend, asa
lover with his beloved one.” Now that I see what I have
never seen before, I am delighted, and my heart is shaken

«7 No one can deny the beauty of this passionate burst of enthusiasm from the
lips of Arjuna, as he strives to grasp the idea of the infinity and universalit
of the Sypreme God, and winds up with the cry of ‘Thou All!’ It is sucl
passages as this and the one that follows, and which is unrivalled in its tender
pathos, that make the Bhagavad-Gita really a poem, and not merely a collection
of philosophical dogmata reduced to shlokas,

48 Awod by the spectacle of Krishna's real greatness, Arjuna shudders at the
familiarity with which he has always treated him, when in his mundane form, as
a friend and comrade; and implores forgiveness.

49 Compare anor anfydnsam in Chapter VIII. shloka 9. This is in the same
manner a play on the word guru, which, as an adjective, means ‘ weighty, im-
portant,’ a8 a substantive, ‘a spiritual teacher.’ The comparative garfyan has, of
course, the meaning of the former. Asya must be taken as agrecing with guros,
and the allusion is to Brahm&, who is considered in the light of a spiritual teacher
of the world, in having delivered to xt the Vedas. Another reading found in the
Galeutta edition, the elition of the Mahabhdrata, and the Scholia of Madhustdana,
is gurur, tho nom. sing., instead of guros, the gen. sing., which would render the
translation of the sentence, ‘thou art to be honoured as the most important
teacher of the univeyse,’ asya being supposed to refer to lokasya in the precoding
line, Bothgthe sense and the construction make the reading adopted preferable.

$0 Priydydrhasi = priydyah + arhasi, the former word being in the genitive
fem. sing., and the final visarga rejected, an irregularity supported by Schlegel in
his note, by quoting Ramayana, i, xliv. 9, and VII. 22 of our own poem.
(See Note.)’ It would be simpler to resolve it into priydym + arhasi, the former
‘word being taken for the dat. sing. masc. ; but, as Schlegel observes, the genitive is,
demanded by its preseneo in the preceding couples of words, and both the sense
and the construction favour the genitive feminine.



===== PAGE 221 / 300 =====

82 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

with awe. Show me that® other form only, O god! Be
gracious, O king of gods! habitation of the universe! With
thy tiara, thy staff and thy discus in thy hand, thus only do
I desire to see thee. Invest thyself with that four-armed
form, thou of a thousand arms, of every form |’

"THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘T have shown thee that supreme form, Arjuna! in kind-
ness to thee, by my own mystic virtue,—that, which is my
splendid, universal, infinite, primeval form, never yet beheld
by other than thee. Not by studying the Vedas, nor by
almsgiving, nor rites, nor severe mortification, can I be seen
in this form, in the world of man, by other than thee, O best
of the Kurus! Be not alarmed, or in a troubled condition, at
having seen this so terrible form of mine. But look, free
from fear, with happy heart, upon that other form only of
mine, namely, this.’

SANJAYA SPOKE.

‘Vasudeva, having thus addressed Arjuna, showed him
again his proper form, and the Great One consoled him who
was alarmed, by again assuming a pleasant shape.’ ,

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘Now that I behold this thy pleasant human shape, thou
who art prayed to by mortals! I am composed in my right
mind, and brought back to my natural condition.’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘That form of mine which thou hast seen is very difficult
to behold. Even the gods are always anxious to behold that

" Tad, ‘ that yonder,’ as opposed to idam, ‘this present,’ refers to the mundane
form, which he had quitted,

% ‘The use of idem after tad is not here a redundancy, but marke the actual
change of form taking place atthe time he is speaking. At the moment at which
he says Cad, he is stilt fm his univereal form ; but when afterwards he adds tdam,
he has resumed his mundane form, which is consequently idam, ‘this present.”

% As contrasted with ghora, ‘ terrible,’ the epithet of his universal form.


===== PAGE 222 / 300 =====

THE VISION OF THE UNIVERSAL FORM. 83

form. Neither by studying the Vedas, nor mortification, nor
almsgiving, nor sacrifice, can I be seen in such a form as
thou hast seen me. But only by worship, of which alone I
am the object, can I be really known and seen, Arjuna, and
approached in this form, O harasser of thy foes! He who
performs his actions for me, intent on me, devoted to me,
free from interest, and from enmity towards any being, comes
to me, O son of Pandu!’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc. (stands) the Bleventh
Chapter, by name

‘THE VISION OF THE UNIVERSAL-FORM,’
M Who does not neglect his duties, but performs them without any selfish

interest, and as sacrifices to me. Schlegel has, ‘mihi grata opera qui perficit,’ a
freedom which, I think, neither precedent nor the composition authorizes.


===== PAGE 223 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.

ARJUNA SPOKE.

“Of those who reverence thee as worshippers, thus! ever
devoted, and those also who worship the indivisible and
unmanifested, which are the most skilled in devotion ?’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘Those who worship me, placing their hearts on me with
constant devotion, and gifted with the highest faith, are con-
sidered by me as the most devoted. But those who worship
the indivisible, indemonstrable, unmanifested, omnipresent,
difficult to contemplate,’ all-pervading, immoveable, and firm,

1 Evam must be taken with satatayuktah, and be understood to refer to the last
shloka of the preceding Chapter. ‘The opposition is not merely between the forms
under which the Supreme Being is worshipped, but between the nature of the
worship addressed to him under each of these forms, ‘These forms are two, the
vyakta and the aryakta, The eyakta, or manifested form, is that which was
described by Krishna himself in Chapter X., and which has been shown to Arjuna,
as detailed in Chapter XI. It is the Supreme Being considered in his universality
cand in his relation to matter. It is his manifestation in his own works throughout
the universe. ‘Ihe aryakta, or unmanifested form, on the other hand, is the
Supreme Being considered in his exclusively spiritual unity, as spirit separate
from matter, apart from and exclusive of everything else. This is, of course, the
higher, as being the more spiritual character of the Supreme One; but when
Arjuna asks under which form it is better to worship him, Krighna replies imme-
diately under the vyakta, or manifested form, and immediately adds his reasons,
namely, that contemplation of the Supreme Being, in his purely spiritual
character, was too dificult to be practical. |The mode of worshipping the tyakta,
or universal manifestation, would be almost the same as that of worshipping him
in his separate manifestations, as some one of the deities, ete., namely’, practice,
the rites of religion, practical devotion /karmayoga), and adherence to the duties
of caste. The mode of worshipping the avyakta can only be the most abstract
contemplation and elevation of thought; and though this is very praiseworthy
‘when it can be accbmplished, its very difficulty, and the necessity it entails of
neglect of one’s duties, render it less acceptable.

? Lit., ‘not to be thought upon,’ on account of his spiritual, formless, and
immaterial character.


===== PAGE 224 / 300 =====

DEVOTION THROUGH WORSHIP. _ 85

—if they restrain all the senses; and are equally minded
towards everything, and rejoice in the good of all beings,
(also) attain to me only. Their labour is greater, since their
thoughts are directed to an object which has no manifest
form. For the path‘ which is not manifest is with difficulty
attained by mortals. But if men renounce in me all their
actions, intent on me, and meditating on me with exclusive
devotion, worship me,—if their thoughts are directed towards
me, I become ere long, O son of Prith! their extricator from
the ocean of the world of mortality. Dispose thy heart
towards me only, to me attach thy thoughts, without doubt
thou wilt dwell within me on high after this life. But if>
thou art not able to compose thy thoughts immoveably on
me, strive then to reach me by assiduous devotion, O despiser
of wealth! If¢ thou art not capable even of assiduity, be
intent on the performance of actions for me.’ Thou wilt
attain beatitude even if thou only performest actions for my
sake.” If® thou art unable to do even this, though filled with
devotion to me, then abandon (the consideration of ) the fruit
of every action, being self-restrained. For knowledge is
better than assiduity, contemplation is preferred to know-
ledge, ‘the abandonment of self-interest in every action to
contemplation ; final emancipation (results) immediately from
such abandonment. He who is free from aversion, well-
disposed towards all beings, and also compassionate, unselfish
and unconceited, the same in pain and pleasure, patient,
contented, always devotional, self-governed, firmly resolute,
who directs his heart and thoughts to me (only), and worships
me, is dear to me; and he from whom the world receives

3 Lit., ‘the collection of the senses,’ viz. five senses of perception, five organs
of action, @d the heart.

« ‘The mental approach of the invisible and unmanifested Being.

5 Atha is here put for athached. Compare Ramby. ii. 60, 3; Hitopadesha iii.
139, ete. .

© ‘The absence of atha in these two shlokas is accounted for by the hypothetical
force being carried on from shloka 9. Compare Gita-Govinda, p. 112,

As a sacrifice to me, offered in a spirit of devotion.


===== PAGE 225 / 300 =====

86 BHAGAVAD-GITA. CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.

no emotions and who receives no emotions from the world,
who is free from the emotions of joy, envy, and fear, is dear
to me. He who has no worldly expectations, who is pure,
upright, unconcerned, free from anxiety, and from any
interest in all his undertakings, and worships me, is dear to
me. He who neither rejoices, nor hates, nor grieves, nor
loves, who has no interest in good or bad, and is full of
devotion, is dear to me. The man who is the same to a foe or
a friend, in honour or ignominy, the same in cold or heat,
pleasure and pain, and free from interests, alike in blame or
praise, taciturn, and content with whatever may be; who has
no home,’ who is steady-minded and full of devotion, is dear
tome. But those who attend (at the banquets of) this sacred
ambrosia,!° as I have explained it, full of faith, intent on me,
and worshippers of me, are dear to me above all.’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Twelfth Chapter,
by name

‘DEVOTION THROUGH WORSHIP.’

® These emotions are immediately explained as joy, envy, and fear, or anxiety,
—feelings which a man receives from his relations with his fellow-creatures.
® Who abandons his relation with the world, even so far as to quit ‘his home
and retire to solitary contemplation in the woods,
1 In Chapter X. shloka 18, Arjuna has designated the mystic doctrine of the
aniversal manifestation of the Supreme Being as ambrosia, or food for immortality,
~ The word is used with the same referonce here, and Krishna again declares what
he has said in shloke 2, that those who worship him under this universal form—
the Supreme Being in his relation to matter—are the best of all devotees.


===== PAGE 226 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH:

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.”

‘This body, O son of Kunti! is called kshetra.3 Those who

1 We now commence the third division of our poem. As has been said in
Chepter VII. note 1, its first six Chapters treat of the practical dogmata of the
Yoga system, following, of course, Patanjali’s school. In the noxt six our philo-
sopher has treated of its theology, the peculiar province of the Bhagavad-Gita
itself; while in these last six Chapters he will bring forward the speculative
or Sinkhya portion, following more closely in the steps of Kapila and Ishwara
Krishna, though of course, distinguished from them by the introduction of u deity
throughout. In the Introduction it will have been seen that all which exists, is
divided into two great heads,—matter and spirit. Each of these is again sub -
divided,—matter into the developed principle, commonly called jagat, the universe;
and the undeveloped principle, called prakriti, or nature :—spirit into dividuated
and non-dividuate, or the soul of man and the universal spirit, called the Supreme
Being. From those four categories, triads or rather triplets are sometimes formed,
such as God, soul, and matter, which is the one here treated of ; or spirit, nature,
and tha world, as afterwards employed ;—nature and the world being in the first
comprehended under ‘ matter ;’ God and soul in the second under ¢ spirit.”

2 In the MS. D. of the Royal Library at Paris, in two MSS. of London, and in
the Calcutta edition of the Mahabhérata, this Chapter is commenced ‘by the
following shloka :

“ ARJUNA SPOKE.
Nature and also spirit, shetra and also Aphetrajna,
This I desire to learn, and spiritual knowledge and the object of spiritual
Knowledge, 0 Hairy One!”

‘Wilkins had it also before him in the Benares MS. from which he translated, The
majority of the MSS,, and the Calcutta edition of the Bhagavad-Gité, do not
contain it, and as it bears all the impress of an insertion by some studious and
verse-making copyist, who did not see his way very clearly in tho order here
followed, we imitate Schlegel and Galanos in entirely omitting it.

3 We leave theso words untranslated, as they are philosophical terms which it
impossible to render correctly by any corresponding terms in English, Khetra
ia literally ‘body,’ not merely the porsonal body, but the body considered as an

-gregate of all the components (23 in number), all the attributes, and all the life
of matter in its development. ‘This is explained in shloka 6, and, in short, it is
matter generally, represented by the body. Nor must this be supposed to be merely
the body of man. It signifies every organic aggregate of matter (and by the
Hindds even inorganic bodies, as stones, minerals, etc. arb comprehended under
this head) which contains a soul. ‘The Aphetrajna is the individual soul which
exists in such Aplecras, and is in the next line declared to be (that is, to be part
of) the Supreme Spirit, The literal meaning of the word is, ‘ that which undew-



===== PAGE 227 / 300 =====

88 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.

know the truth of things¢ call that which knows this (kghetra),
kshetrajna.® And know also that I am the Ashetrajna in all
kshetras,> Bh&rata! That which is the knowledge of the
kghetra and the kshetrajna is considered by me to be spiritual
knowledge.6 What that Ashefra is, and what it is like, and
to what changes it is liable, and from what it originates, all
this, whatever’ (it may be), and what that (kshetrajna) is,
and of what it is capable, learn in a compendious form from
me,—which has been sung in various ways by the Rishis,®
separately, in different hymns,* and also in metres of the well-
demonstrated Brahmasitras,? which treat of causes.!° The
great elements,! the egotism, the intellect, and also the prin-

stands the Aphetra.’ It must bo remembered that the Hindi philosophers believed
the soul to be placed within the body in order to work out its emancipation from
material and individual existence, to which the Supreme Spirit has consigned it,
by causing it to cmanate from himself, That emancipation can only be worked
out by a complete and just comprehension of the nature of mattor and its true
relations with individual soul and the Supreme Spirit. Hence it is called the
“comprchender of matter.’

« Philosophers : alluding to Kapila, Ishwara Krishna, and their followers.

5 In this declaration, that the Supreme Spirit is the soul within all bodies,
there is no denial of the individuality of the soul, merely an assertion that it is
part, though a dividuated part, of the Universal Spirit.

© The knowledge by which emancipation is attained.

1 The word yat, repeated here at the end of the shloka, though alrchdy in-
troduced as the third word in it, is not, however, redundant, but refers not to tat
Aghetram, which is answered by the first yat, but to the tat before samdsena. It
is the peculiarity of the relative sentence in Sanskrit, that every relative pronoun
should, if possible, be balanced by a demonstrative one, and vice versd; but it is
impossible to mark this swinging in an English translation,

5 The use of the word chhandas would seom to denote that the allusion was to
the Vedas, and that the Rishis here mentioned were those to one of whom each of
the hymns in those books is inscribed. ‘The context, however, demands a wider
signification for both Rishi and chhandas, the former being, probably, the philo-
sophers of the Sankhya and Yoga schools, as Kapila, Patanjali, etc., called 20
from their piety and wisdom : the latter alluding to their productions,

® ‘This is the title of the well-known work of Badérayana, on the Vedénta

tem. It has, however, been generally considered as posterior to the * Bhagavad-
Cité," nor could our author attribute the teaching of purely Sénkhys. doctsines to
a Vedénta philosopher. I should conjecture that the name referred generally to
works on the Yoga system, Brahma being understood to mean the Supreme Being.

1 ‘That is, generally, of philosophy, the object of philosophy being to explain
the causes of the existence of the universe, aud the connection of the soul with
matter, etc.

11 Tt would be beyotd the limits of these notes to enter in detail into the nature
of the Sankhya system of cosmology, of which we have here so brief a summary.

fe reader to that part of our Introduction which treats of the
Sinkhya system, and it will here suffice to recapitulate the meaning of the terms



===== PAGE 228 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH KSHETRA AND KSHETRAJNA. 89

ciple of life, and the eleven organs and the five objects of
sense—desire, aversion, happiness, unhappiness, multiplicity
of condition, reflection, resolution, (all) this is briefly deno-
minated Ashetra with its passions.’? Modesty, sincerity,
innocence, patience, honesty, reverence towards preceptors,
purity, constancy, self-government,— indifference towards
objects of sense; and also unselfishness, contemplation of
birth, death, old age, sickness, pain, and error,’—disinterest-

used, merely calling to remembrance that the order here employed is not the
philosophical arrangement, nor even that of our author’s fancy, but purely sub-
servient to the metre. ‘The twenty-five components of all existing things, whether
spirit or matter, with the exception of the Supreme Being himself,—in short,
of the whole creation, —are thus ranked in the Sankhya system :—

a. 1. Prakpiti (hero called avyakta), the undevdlopel principle or essence of
matter, from which the next twenty-three components, called altogether
eyakta, or developed matter, emanate, viz. :

4.2, Buddhi, intelligence, that which transmits external impressions
received through the senses to the soul,—the eyes, as it were, of the soul,
—which produces,

¢. 8, Ahankéra, egotism, the consciousness of individual existence, which

wroduces,

ats. Tanmdtrcni (here called indriyagochara), the five subtile elements
of matter, the elements of the elements; the atoms which, when aggre-
gated, form the elements, ‘They are sound, feel, colour, sapidity, and
odour; each of these, in their turn, produces each of the,

¢. 9-13. Mahdbhitdni, five grosser elements, ether (dkdsh), air (odyu),
fire (agné, light and heat), water /dp/, and earth. ‘Thus sound produces
ether; feel, air; colour, light, ete. ‘The subtile elemonts being united to

+ the grosser elements, noxt produce,

Jf. 14A—18, Indriya, the five senses of perception, hearing, feeling, seeing,
tasting and smelling, and next,

g 19-23, Karmendriya, the five organs of action, also considered as
senses, which are the voice, the hands, the feet, the anus, and the penis,
Lastly, ahankdra produces,

A, 24. Manas, the heart, the internal organ of perception, which receives
the external impressions of the senses, and transmits them through the
chankdra and the intellect to the soul, and is the seat of the passions, ete.

i. 26. Atmd or purugha, the individual soul.

It is the twenty-three components from 4 to / inclusive which form the Xghetra :
thus the makdbhi¢dni aro "e's the ahankéra ise’ ; the buddhi, “3°; the eleven
indriydni are ‘f, g,’ and ‘h? (manas being considered as an internal sense) ; the
five indriyagocharas, ‘d.' Another component, however, is here mentioned, which
requires some explanation—namely, ayakta. This we know to be a name for
prakriti, the undeveloped principle or essence of matter; but since Aphetra can
with strictness only refer to developed matter, it can scarcely be understood to
include the undeveloped principle also. ‘This principle, however, while apart from
matter, as the essence from which it emanates, is also connected with it as being
the principle of vita? existence, and in this sense it must be here understood:

12 The passions (lit., ‘changes') belonging to animate matter are those seven just
named (desire, ete.), and must, of course, be referred.to*the sensitive part of
matter, the manas,

1 Consideration of the evil and misery of this life, in order that he may not
‘become seduced and attached to it by its apparent good and heppiness, .


===== PAGE 229 / 300 =====

90 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.

edness, and indifference towards one’s children, wife, and
household, and constant equanimity both in pleasant and
unpleasant circumstances,—attentive worship by exclusive
devotion to me, frequenting of solitary spots, a distaste for
the society of men,—perseverance in acquiring knowledge of
the Adhyétmé4," consideration of the advantage of a know-
ledge of the truth,“—this is called spiritual knowledge; that
which is contrary to this, ignorance, I will declate to thee
what the object of spiritual knowledge is.” He who knows it
eats ambrosia.!® It is called the Supreme Being, without
beginning, neither the existent nor non-existent.!® It pos-
sesses hands and feet in all directions; eyes, heads, and faces
in all directions; having ears in all directions, he exists in
the world, comprehending all things ;—resplendent with the
faculties of all the senses,” yet disconnected from all the
senses; disinterested, and yet sustaining all things;”! free

14 If this doctrine be accused of unnatural austerity, we can only reply that the
salvation of one’s soul was justly deemed paramount to all worldly ties, he nearest
and dearest of which are here mentioned ; and refer our readers to the same injunc-
tion, in almost the same terms, from the mouth of the only unerring Preceptor,
“If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple.’ St. Luke xiv. 26. Neither the Divine guide nor the Hind4 philosopher
meant that these words should be construed literally; both, on the contrary,
exhort their hearers to brotherly love, with which it would be impossible to hate
one’s father and mother, etc.; but they only mean that where one’s salvation
requires it, even the nearest carthly ties must be disregarded.

1 See Chapter VIII. note 1.

16 Consideration that such knowledge is necessary to the attainment of final
emancipation.

1 The object to be known is, of course, the Supreme Being in all phases,

48 That is, enjoys immortality, which is final emancipation.

® Compare Chapter 1X. note 30, and XI. shloka 37, in which places it is said
that the Supreme Being is both spirit and matter ; here Krighna says that the
Supreme Being is not called either one or the other. He is not called spirit,
because he is not spirit alone, but both spint and matter; he is not called matter
for the same reason.

2% He possesses all those faculties of seeing, hearing, ete., which the senses give
to man; but since he has no material body like man, he does not possess those
senses themselves, and is therefore, of course, free from the evil influence which
they have in attaching man to the world, etc,

21 ‘That is, he acts without interest in his actions. As Krishna himself says
elsewhere, he has nothing to gain, since all things are his; he can, therefore, have
no interest in his actions, but nevertheless he continues to act. He has created
the universe, but does not now cease from actions, but sustains and cherishes that
which he has formed,


===== PAGE 230 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH KSHETRA AND KSHETRAJNA. 91

from (the influence of the three) qualities, yet possessing
every quality ;* existing both apart from and within existing
things, both inanimate and also animate. It cannot be
recognized on account of its subtilty, and it exists both far
and near. Not distributed among beings, and yet existing as
if (it were so) distributed.* And it is to be known as that
which sustains existing things, and both devours and pro-
duces them again This light, also, of luminous bodies is
said to be superior to da-kness.”* It is spiritual knewledge
itself,” the object of that knowledge to be obtained by
spiritual knowledge implanted in every heart. Thus have
the kshetra, the spiritual knowledge, and the object of that
knowledge been briefly declared. He who worships me and
can discern this (spirit in all things) is conformed to my
nature. Learn that nature and spirit,®* also, are both of them
indeed without beginning. And know that the passions and
the (three) qnalities are sprung from nature. Nature is said
to be that which causes the power of doing what must be
done in the organs.*? Spirit is said to be that which causes

21 The three qualities that influence matter, sattwa, rajas, and tamas, have no
effect on him, in spite of his conncetion with matter, still he possesses the powers
which those qualities give to matter.

23 In his individuality, he is separate from matter; in his universality, exists
within it.

% Considered as a single indivisible personal spirit, he is not really divisible
among beings ; but since the soul which exists within them emanates from and is
actually identical with him, he is within them, as if he were divisible,

25 He here speaks of him as the material essence (prakriti), into which all
things are re-absorbed, as if it devoured them and again caused them to emanate.

% This is seid metaphorically. "The Tight isthe Supreme Being considered as
iMlumining or inspiring with knowledge those who ero devoted to him, and thus
surmounting darkness, which is ignorance,

2 This is eo forced an idea that,we should greatly prefer to read jndna-
Jneyam, But?
38 See Chapter VIII. note 1, under adhidaiva, Here, however, it is said of
irit generally, the nature of which will be explained in Chapter XV. He has
already explained matter (kphetra), god (jneya/, and spiritual knowledge (jndna).
It remains for him to treat of the material essence or yatere (prakriti) and the
soul, and of tho general connection of matter and spirit.

% ‘The material esvenco it alao the vital principle, and this it is which gives lt
motion, and the power of action to the organs of all animate things. ‘



===== PAGE 231 / 300 =====

92 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.

the power of experiencing pleasure and pain (in matter).
For spirit, when invested with matter,! experiences the
influence of the qualities which spring from nature. Its
connection with those qualities is the cause of its regeneration
in a good or evil womb.” The Supreme Spirit within this
body is called the spectator and admonisher, sustainer,
enjoyer, great lord, and also highest soul. He who thus
understands spirit and nature with its qualities, in ‘whatever
way he may have lived, is never born again (on earth). Some
behold the soul by their mind’s eye, by means of contempla-
tion on themselves, others by Sénkhya-Yoga, and others
by Karma-Yoga.* But others respect it, not knowing it
in this manner, but having heard it explained by others.
And even these, if studious of such tradition, even sur-
mount mortality.** Know, O Prince of the Bharatas! that
as often as anything which exists,” animate or inanimate,

3 Still, though the organs may be put in motion by the vital principle, there
gan be no rel sensibility or pereeption of external objceis without a soul within

¢ body.

21 This is an explanation of the manner in which the soul gives that sensibility
to the body. When the soul is disconnected from matter, ie. before and after its
individual existence, the three qualitics whose influence is confined to matter can
have no effect upon it; when, however, the soul is once united to matter, they
have effect on it through the medium of matter, and thus the soul, before incapable
of receiving any impressions from external objects, when influenced by these
qualities, is enabled to appreciate the good or bad in external matter.

32 Since these qualities are, at best, all bad, their influence on the soul through
the medium of matter is productive of that dreaded evil,—regeneration on earth ;
but if the soul has acquired more of the influence of the saffwa-guna, or quality
of goodness, it is born again in a good womb : that is, in the family of Bréhmans
or superior Kshatriyas ; if more of rajo-guna, or quality of badness, it is born in a
bad womb, such as Vaishyas or Shadras, etc.

% Alluding to the Supreme Being in his own body, in the person of Krishna.

™ These are devotees who follow different systems. ‘The first is that of con-
templation,—the pure Sankhya system ; the second, which he calls Sankhya- Yoga,
is that branch of the Yoga system which confines itsclf to cxclusivo, ascetic, and
contemplative devotion, and rejects all works; the third is tho choice doctrine of
the Bhagavad-Gits, devotion united to works and actions. Compare III. 3—6.
The Sénkhya-Yoge is also called Jnina-Yoga, and tho only difference Yetween i
and the pure Sankhya is, that the former acknowledges and enjoins worship of a
Supreme Being, the latter is virtually atheistic.

% These, as contrasted with devotees themselves, are mercly studious and
zealous disciples,

36 And attain to the only true immortality,—final emancipation.

* The abstract (lit,, ‘existence’) is here put for the concrete, ‘ that which exists.”



===== PAGE 232 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH KSHETRA AND KSHETRAJNA. 93

is produced, it is so on account of the conjunction of body
and soul.8 He, who perceives that the highest lord exists
alike imperishable in all perishable things, sees indeed ;
for, perceiving the same lord present in everything, he
does not himself destroy his own soul, but attains the
highest path. But he who perceives that all actions are
entirely performed by nature“ only, perceives that he himself
is therefore not an agent. When he recognizes the individual
existence of everything to be comprehended in one, and to be
only an emanation from it,‘' he then attains to the Supreme
Being. This supreme eternal soul, even when existing
within the body, O son of Kunti! neither acts nor is
affected * by action, on account of its eternity, and freedom
from the qualities? As the ether, though it penetrates
everywhere, is not polluted on account of its rarity, so the
soul, though present in every (kind of ) body, is not polluted
(by action). As one sun illumines the whole of this world, so
does (one) spirit illumine the whole of matter,“4 Bhérata!

38 All the translators have ‘by the conjunction,’ ote., as if the reading were
sanyogena and not sanyogdt. They have evidently been ‘misled by the idea that
+Kghetra snd kghetrajna alluded to matter and spirit, and the knowledge that the
emanation of developed matter from natire was caused by the conjunction of the
Supreme Spirit, as man, with the material essence or naturo, as wife. The
meaning seems to me to be simply that the cause of the emanation of developed
matter was the conjunction of soul and body, by means of which conjunction the
soul effects its emancipation. He therefore mercly states that the reason for the
Production of matter was to assist the soul in emancipaing itself when once placed
within the body for that purpose, since it is by a knowledge of the real truth,
required through the investigation of visiblo developed matter by the senses, that
emancipation is achieved.

2 Sinco he perceives that his soul is a portion of the Supreme Being existing
within him, and on that account, if on no otter, he is desirous to work out his
gmancipaton, and uot by his neglect and erimes to precipitate the‘ divine spark?
into hell,

«© ‘That is, by the action of the three qualities which spring from nature.

‘That all existing things, although they exist separately, are one and the same
Supreme Being, and merely so far distinct from him, that they are emanations
from his nfaterial essence.

© Lit,, ‘is polluted,’

4 The qualitics aro what really act, by their influence, on matter. The soul is
passive, and although the qualities influence it through shemmedium of the body,
they cannot render it active.

44 The souls in every body, although individual, are really only one and the
same, viz. the Supreme Spirit. Thus one soul illumines every body. >



===== PAGE 233 / 300 =====

94 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.

Those who thus perceive by the eye of knowledge the dif-
ference between kshetra and kshetrajna, and the emancipation
of beings from nature, go to the Supreme.’
Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Thirteenth
Chapter, by name
‘DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH THE KSHETRA AND
KSHETRAJNA.’

‘5 From material existence.


===== PAGE 234 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘I will explain further? the great spiritual knowledge, the
chief of sciences, by the knowledge of which all Munis®
attain the highest beatitude after this life. Having acquired
this knowledge, they attain to fellowship‘ with me, and are
not regenerated even at the new creation, nor disturbed at
the general destruction.5 The great Brahma® is a womb for
me; in it I depose the fetus. The production of all existing
things is from it, O descendant of Bh4rata! Brahma is the
great womb for every form which is produced in any womb.”
I am the father which provide the seed. Goodness, badness,

1 In this Chapter he treats of the three gunas, or natural qualities, which
influence all matter (for a detailed account of this doctrine see Introduction), but
only in d very general manner. The qualities are firstly accurately described ;
their action is then specified ; and, Instly, the future state of the beings influenced
more particularly by each of them.

2 T will continue to explain.

3 Used generally for a pious devotee.

* Sddharmya has been misunderstood by Wilkins. The clement dharma,
from which it has been derived, has here no allusion to law or virtue, but simply
to ofice. Sddharmin is a man whose duty or office, or even business, is the same
as one’s own; and hence means a fellow, a companion.

® At the commencement or conclusion of each Kalpa, See Chap. VIII. note 19.

* Brahma is here neuter. Throughout our poem the neuter of this word bas
‘eon employed to designate the Supreme Being himself in his most general
character. This cannot be the case here, since Krishna speaks of himself as the
Bupremo Being, and Brahma as distinct from him. At the same time it has
nothing to do with Brahm&, masculine. But as Brahmé (mase.) is the mytho-
logical personification of the creative power of a Vedic or semi-mythological
Supreme Being, so is Brahma here the ilosophical type of the creative principle
of the philosophical Supreme Being. He is not a persomfication, nor even separate
from the Supreme Being, but merely a part of him distinct from spirit, the
material essence inherent in him, by means of which, himself then both efficient
and material creator, he produces the universe. .

1 Not merely those forms or bodies which are literally born from the wombs of
gods, men, or boasts; but generally whatever is produced from anything elie, and »

4



===== PAGE 235 / 300 =====

96 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

and indifference,—the qualities thus called, sprung from
nature, influence the imperishable soul® within the body, O
strong-armed one! Of these, goodness is lucid and free from
disease, on account of its spotlessness, and implicates! (the
soul) by means of connection with the pleasant, and connec-
tion with knowledge, O sinless one! Know that badness,
being of the nature of desire, arises from appetite and pro-
pensity. This implicates (the soul), O son of Kunti! by
connection with action. But know that indifference, arising
from ignorance, is the delusion of all mortals. This impli-
cates (the soul) by means of folly, idleness, and sloth, O son
of Bhdrata! Goodness connects (the soul) with pleasure,
badness with action, Bhdrata! but indifference surrounding
knowledge connects it indeed! with folly.2 When one
has surmounted badness and indifference, goodness exists,
Bharata! badness when one has surmounted goodness and
also indifference; indifference when one has surmounted
goodness and badness. When knowledge, the bright light,

therefore all things. The object in introducing these two shlokas, before explain-
ing the three guvas, is to show what relation the material essence (commonly
called prakyiti, but here Brahma), from which they spring, bears to the Supreme
Spirit on the one hand, and to matter on the other.

® The words are translated frecly, as otherwise the sense of the whole Chapter
would remain obscure. Literally ‘they would be ‘reality,’ ‘impulse,’ and
‘darkness.’ See Introduction,

® Through the medium of matter, to which their direct influence is confined.
Thus they atfect the senses, which transmit their good or bad impressions to the
seat of sensibility (manas) ; this, again, forwards them to individual consciousness
(ahankdraJ, and this to the intellect (buddhi), which, being in direct communi-
cation with the soul, conveys them to it.

10 Lit.: ‘binds,’ viz. in the bonds of transmigration.

4 Lassen has a long irrelevant note on the force of wa, very useful in a
grammar of the Vedas, but of doubtful value for a poem of the date of ours.
Buffice it to say, that, as he has shown, the fanciful explanation of the scholiasts
must be rejected, and the common use of the particle throughout the Mah&bharata,
and other works of like style and approximate date, be accepted, namely, that of a
confirmative expletive.

1 a he whole of this shloka seems to me merely a recapitulation of’ shlokes 6,
and 8,

13 This is ill expressed, though the meaning is obvious. Goodness predominates
when the other two quajities are conquered or suppressed ; badness when the other
two are in the minority, etc. The three qualities, it must be remembered, are
never separated ; they always act in concert, and, however good the soul may be,
as even Brabmé himself, tho highest of material beings, some small portion of



===== PAGE 236 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH THE THREE QUALITIES. 97

has been produced through all the entrances ™ into this body,
then one may know that goodness indeed is matured. Avidity,
activity, undertaking of actions, restlessness and covetousness,
these are produced when badness is matured, O Prince of
Bhérata! Absence of light and of activity, folly, and also
delusion,—these are produced when indifference is matured,
O son of Kuru! But when a mortal reaches his dissolution,
and goodness is matured within him, he then approaches the
spotless worlds of those who obtain the highest place.6 He
who reaches dissolution during (the predominance of) badness,
is born again in those who are attached to actions,” and one
who dies in indifference, is born again in the wombs of the
senseless.!8 They call the reward of a good action, of the
quality of goodness and spotless ; the reward of badness, pain;
the reward of indifference, ignorance? From goodness is
produced knowledge, from badness only desire; from in-
difference spring folly, delusion, and also ignorance. Those

badness and indifference remains within it. It is only the proportion of their
admixture which is here alluded to, since it is impossible that tho soul, while
united to material existence, can entircly subdue or eradicate any one of these
qualities,

4 As the body has been called the mansion of the soul, so are the senses,
through which the inhabiting spirit receives knowledge, considered as its doors.

1 The absence of light, the distinguishing attribute of goodness ; and of activity,
that of badness.

18 Wilkins, Schlegel, and Galanos have here rendered wttamaviddm as if it
meant ‘those who understand the Supreme Spirit.’ Such understanding is,
however, constantly declared to be the gate to emancipation, and the sentence
would therefore signify that those in whom goodness predominated were emanci-
pated. This is obviously not the senso, since in shlokas 20 and 26 we are told that
one must entirely overcome the influence of all three qualities, in order to be

st of

the three places hero mentioned as the futures of the three different classes of
Deings, ‘and the allusion is to the worlds of Brahma, tho Pitrs, the Devas, ete,
(eee Chapter V. note 39), as contrasted with the bodies of men or beasts on earth,

‘ence, too, the use of the word okdn in the plural. Had it referred to the
Supreme Spfrit, as the translations would lead us to suppose, the word Joka, if
used at all, must have been in the singular number.

17 ‘The worldly, and consequently wicked, among men.

18 Beasts and inorganic matter, we

1 As knowledge is to the Hind@ philosopher, as well as to the Hebrew
monarch, the greatest good, ignorance is the greatest evil to which the soul can be



===== PAGE 237 / 300 =====

98 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

who remain in goodness, go upwards ; those of the quality of
badness remain in a middle state. Those of indifference,
remaining in a state of the lowest qualities, go downwards.”
When the spectator! acknowledges no agent but the quali-
ties, and comprehends that which is superior® to the
qualities, he approaches my being. Having overcome the
three qualities which co-originate* with the body, the soul,
released from regeneration, mortality, age, and pain, eats of
ambrosia.’ *
ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘By what marks is one who has overcome these three
qualities (distinguished), O master? What is his course of
life P and how does he overcome these three qualities P’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE,

‘He who*® does not hate (the three qualities), bright-
ness, activity, and also delusion,?° O son of Pandu! when
they come forth (from nature’s bosom), nor long for them

20 This is mercly a recapitulation of shlokas 14 and 15. Upwards and down-
wards must be understood to allude to the scale of states, or rather bodies, in
which the soul may be confined in transmigration. According to Kapila /Sankhya
Pravachana, iii. 42) and his disciple Ishwara Krishna (Saukhya Karik6, shloka 63),
these bodies are fourteen in number, distributed in three classes, in the followin;
descending order :—The first class were deemed divine, or rather superhuman, an
were eight in number, viz.: 1. Brahma and the suporior gods; 2. ‘The Prajépatis
or great progenitors of the human race; 3. Saumya or lunar bodies; 4. Indra
and the inferior gods (Devas); 6. Gandharvas, heavenly minstrels or angels ;
6. Rakshasas; 7. Yakshas; 8. Pish&chas, ‘The second class was man. The third
were beings inferior to man, of five kinds, viz.: 10. Pashu, domestic animals ;
11. Myiga, wild beasts; 12. Birds; 13. Reptiles, fishes, and insects. 14. Vege-
tables and inorganic bodies, Going upwards was, therefore, entering the region of
any of the first cight; going downwards being re-born in any of the last five. The
middle state was man.

21 ‘The soul, which Kapila and other philosophers compare to a spectator sitting
passively in the body, and watching the operations of nature, which is likened to
a ballet-girl dancing on the stage of life.

22 ‘The Supreme Being.

% Schlegel wrongly ‘e corpore genitis.’ They do not spring frova the body,
but from nature, and are, therefore, co-originate with all matter, and, consequently,
with the body. ' Remark the force of the preposition sam in aamudbhavdn.

4 The food of immortality, which is union with the Supreme Being.

2 The yo in the next shloka is also the subject here,

% Merely other names for the three qualities, sattwa, rajas, and tamas. See
Indroduction.


===== PAGE 238 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH THE THREE QUALITIES. 99

when they return to it’—who, sitting as if unconcerned, is
not agitated by the qualities, and who does not waver, but
(clings to the persuasion) “that the qualities exist ;”” who is
the same in pain and pleasure, self-contained, with the same
(feelings) towards a lump of earth, a stone, or gold; equally-
minded to those whom he likes and those whom he dislikes,
constant, £qually-minded in blame or praise of himself,—in
honour or disgrace,—towards both parties, friends or foes;
free from self-interest in all undertakings: he is said to have
overcome the qualities. And he who worships me® with
religious and exclusive devotion, when he has overcome the
qualities, is fitted for the existence of the Supreme Spirit.
For I® indeed am the representative of the Supreme Spirit,
and of the imperishable ambrosia, and of eternal law, and
of intense happiness.’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Fourteenth
Chapter, by name

‘DEVOTION IN CONNECTION WITH THE THREE QUALITIES.’

7 When they come forth from nature, their action begins; and ceases when
they retuyn to it.

38 Compare, but do not confound, Chapter III. 28, note 31. ‘The meaning is
here, that he knows them to exist, and, therefore, that it is they alone which impel
him towards, or keep him back from, action.

2 Krishna himself. We have here a declaration of what has been understood
throughout ‘our poem,—the identification of Krishna himself with the Supreme

cing.

80 We should conceive that this clause had been added by our artful author,
that his more Brahmanieal and orthodox reader might not teke advantage of the
genitive brahmanas, which may be either neuter or masculine, and interpret it as
alluding to Brahms, the first person of the mythological triad. This he prevents
by identifying it with himself, Krishna or Vighgu.


===== PAGE 239 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.
‘They say that the eternal sacred fig-tree? grows with its

1 This Chapter contains a treatise on the nature of spirit generally. It com-
mences with an allegory (shlokas 1-6), which alludes to the whole universe, the
eternal revolving current of life, under the figure of the Banyan, or sacred fig-trec.
Tt then proceeds to describe spirit in the human body or the individual soul
(shlokas 7—11); then to the universal spirit (shlokas 12—17) ; and, lastly, specifies
spirit, as individual god, the Supreme Being. ‘This division is quite necessary for
a right comprehension of the whole Chapter.

2 For a complete and most interesting account of this tree, which the limits of
our note will not allow us to transcribe, we must refer the reader to Lassen's
excellent work, ‘Indische Alterthumskunde,’ vol. i, pp. 255—260. The Ashwattha
is known to botanists as the Ficus religiosa, and is considered as the male of the
Ficus Indica, or Indian fig-tree, more commonly known to Europeans as the
Banyan. It is found in all parts of India and Ceylon, except on the table-land of
the Dekkan; and every village has one specimen which it honours with all the
reverence due to its sanctity. - It is found separately, and not in the forests, form-
ing, as it does, a forest in itself. At an inconsiderable height from the ground,
the siem pats forth a crown of branches, which, growing for some, distance
horizontally, each lets fall a single shoot, which grows downwards till it reaches
the earth, and there takes root, thus forming a pillar, which supports the parent
branch. ‘Above the first crown of branches another is ‘presently produced, which,
growing beyond the first, lets fall another circle of pillars outside them. ‘This
Process continues till the whole sometimes reaches the hight of 200 fect, and an
unlimited number of secondary stems circle around the original trunk,” A vast
house is thus formed, with innumerable chambers one within another, and in-
creasing, as one penetrates further inward, in mysterious darkness and exhilaratin
coolness, which the hottest sun of India cannot affect. No wonder, then, that this
natural dwelling, offered, as it were, to man, in the place of his own far less
elegant or pleasant constructions ;—no wonder that theso circling mysterious
bowers,—these cool but not close retreats,—planted by Providence, not in the
wild jungle, but in the midst of fertile plains, should win the reverence of the
native whom they sheltered! No wonder that its branches, taking root on earth
and forming new stems, should figure to the reflective the idea of gternal life!
‘And such is, indeed, the type which they presented. Lassen is of opinion that tho
whole passage here inscrted is borrowed from an older source, and quotes a
passage, suppose tobe alluded to by the schlis, from the Kithaka, Upanighad,
vi, 1, in which theres is said to be the Semen’and Brahma(n). He himself,
however, believes the allegory to allude only to the Vedas, from what is said in
shloka 1, that ‘he who knows it, knows the Vedas.’ If I might be permitted to
differ from so high an authority, I ehould conceive that this phrase referred to



===== PAGE 240 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY THE ATTAINMENT TO THE HIGHEST PERSON. 101

roots above and its branches downwards. He who knows
this tree, the leaves of which are Vedic hymns,‘ knows the
Vedas. Its branches® shoot forth downwards and upwards,
nourished and increased by the qualities, and having objects
of sense as tendrils. And their roots, which extend down-
wards, are the connecting bonds of action in the world of
man. Its form is not thus understood in this world, neither
its end, nor beginning, nor its constitution. When one has
hewn down this sacred fig-tree, together with itg wide-
spreading roots,’ with the steady axe of indifference ® (to the
world), then may that® place be sought, to which those who
go return no more. And I allude?” to that primeval spirit

what is said immediately before, that its leaves were Vedic hymns, for he who
knows the whole tree would know the leaves too, and consequently the Vedas, of
which thoy are the hymns. He further quotes a passage transcribed by the
scholiast Madhusédan, from some unknown smriti, in which the tree is said to
represent developed matter, the trunk being intellect, the senses forming the
interior cavity, the branches being the grosser elements of matter, its leaves the
objects of sense, and its fruits the pains and pleasures of this life. "Judging from
the description in our own poem, which bears some resemblance to this, I am
inclined to think with the scholiast, that the allegory is a figure of the whole
universe, the mass of creation, the whole current of revolving material existence.
The earth, then, from which it springs, would be nature, the material essence :
and the branches, the individual bodies, which spring from matter originally, and
again, eventually, return to it; the sap that runs through and influences the
whole would be the three qualities ; the tendrils, would be the objects of sense ;
which are connected to the individual bodics by the senses, and so on.

3 Alluding to the branches themselves afterwards taking root.

+ This may be explained in many ways. In the first place, tradition asserted
that the Vedic hymns were originally written on dry leaves. Again, as a tree puts
forth its leaves for the shelter of the earth, and then discards them to manure it,
so has the material deity (Brahm) put forth the Vedic institutions to shelter
mankind from evil, and delivered them to him for his improvement and cultivation.
Or, as the leaves are the honour and ornament of a tree, the Vedas are the glory
of the world, ete.

5 The individual bodies of all things and beings, nourished by the three
qualities, as the branches are by the sap.

6 As the roots connect the branches moro firmly with the earth from which
they originally sprung, so does action connect the bodies and the souls they
contain more closely with the world, and implicate them in the necessity of
regeneratign,

7 The actions which implicate their agents in regeneration,

® When one has annulled the power of matter and of action by a resolute
indifference to the world,

® The Supreme Being, .

0 Ing aking of that place. Schlegel translates this word by deduco, Galanos
by ‘IT on and Wilkins (Parraud’s trans.) «J'ai rendu manifesto? Let the reader
choose.

s


===== PAGE 241 / 300 =====

102 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.

only, from which the eternal" stream (of life)? emanates.
Those who are free from arrogance and delusion, who have
subdued the vice of attachment to the world, always constant
to the Adhyétmé,® who have repulsed desires, and are free
from the influence of those opposites known as pleasure and
pain, proceed unbewildered to that imperishable place.
Neither sun nor moon illumines that spot. The place, to
which those who go return not, is my supreme dwelling. An
eternal portion’ of me only, having assumed life’ in this
world of life, attracts '* the heart and the five senses,!? which
belong to nature. Whatever body the sovereign spirit’®
enters or quits, it is connected with it by snatching those
senses from nature, even as the breeze snatches perfumes
from their very bed.!® This spirit approaches the objects
of sense, by presiding over the ear,” the eye,” the touch, the
taste, and the smell, and also over the heart. The foolish

1 Lit. : ‘ancient,’ i.e. without beginning.

1 Among other meanings, pravritti has that of ‘a continuous flow or current,
the tide of events,’ ete.

13 See Chapter VIII. note 1.

4 He is now about to speak of the lowest kind of Purugha, or spirit, the in-
dividual soul.

16 Material life, which commences and ends with the universe. Life, like time,
when contrasted with eternity, can only be said of the existence of what is

erishable. Life being a conditional and dependent, not a positive term, cannot
said of what never undergoes death.

48 This is a mode of showing the connection between the soul and matter. The
senses and the heart are the links between the soul and the external world.
‘When, therefore, the soul enters the body, it attracts to itself, that is, connects
with itself these senses, by which it is enabled to obtain that knowledge of the
universe which aids its emancipation.

1 Lit.: ‘the senses, which have the heart as sixth.’ The more correct
rendering would therefore be, ‘the six senses, including the heart ;’ but as the
latter is superior and distinct from the senses, though improperly called a senso
itself, I have preferred the given translation. Schlegel renanka, with truth,
this peculiar construction 1s not unwonted either in Sauskrit or other tongues.
He cites, for the first, Hitopadesha, ed. Bonn, p. 63,7; and 106,16, For the
latter, Juvenal, Sat. i. 64, and the Nibolungen-Lied, verse 1379: | *

‘Selbe vierde degene varn wir an den se,’

\® The soul being a portion (that emanated) of the Supreme Spirit (ishwara).

® From the flowers which contain them.

* Tn these two words the concrete is put for the abstract, the organ itself for
the sense of which it is the site,

« 4 The meaning of this shloka is, that without the soul, and the vital energy



===== PAGE 242 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY THE ATTAINMENT TO THE HIGHEST PERSON. 103

do not perceive it when it quits the body, nor when it remains
(in it), nor when, actuated by the qualities, it enjoys (the
world), But those who have the eyes of knowledge do
perceive it. And devotees, who strive to do so, perceive it
dwelling within themselves; but those who have not overcome
themselves,” being destitute of sense, do not perceive it, even
though they strive to do so. Know that that brilliance *
which enters the sun and illumines the whole earth, and
which is in the moon, and in fire, is of me. And I enter the
ground and support all living things by my vigour; and
I nourish all herbs, becoming that moisture, of which the
peculiar property is taste.* And becoming fire,® I enter the
body of the living, and being associated with their inspiration
and expiration, cause food of the four kinds to digest. And

which accompanies it, the senses would be passive, and have no connection with
the worldly objects /vishaya), which they are intended to grasp. By their inter-
vention, the soul, when it has once pervaded and directed them, becomes cognizant
of the objects of sense.

2 Lit.: (Have not formed themselves.’

23 He now comes to speak (in shlokas 12—16) of the second kind of Puruph
or spirit, the nou-individuate universal vitality, by which all things are
vigorated, not merely with life, but with the properties of the soul in divers
degrees. " This is the Supreme Being, though not in his separate personality, but
inthis connection with matter, When we consider the univerec in the light of a
child produced in the womb of nature (prakriti), which is a part of the Supreme
Being, by impregnation with spirit, the other portion of him, in the place of
semen, we shall understand that that semen which gives the strength, the life, the
vigour to the fotus, is the second Purugha, which, though really an emanation
from the Supreme Being, just as much as individual soul is, and remaining an
emanation only so long as’ matter exists in its development, that is, during the
existence of the universe, is so closcly connected with the Supreme Spirit in his
personal individuality, as to be identificd with him, much more than individual
soul can be.

4 In the cosmology of the Sankhya school, every element contains, as we have
seen, the subtile element which corresponds to cach one of the senses. Thus the
peculiar property of ether /ddsha) is audibleness, or that which corresponds to
the sense of hearing; that of air is tangibleness, corresponding to the sense of
touch, etc. The peculiar property of water is sapidity, which corresponds to the
sense of taste. ‘The water or moisture in the earth enters, then, the vegetable
body, and, becoming sap, lends to it its sweet or sour, bitter or pungent, taste,

2% Vaishwdnara is a name of Agni (seo Seats), It here means the heat of the
stomach, which is supposed to cook the food within it, till all the nourishment is
expunged and transmitted to the blood, etc., and nothiyg but the non-nutritious
pet left to pass away. This process of cooking is therefore nothing but that of

igestion.

26 Which are explained by the scholiast Shridharaswamin to be—Ist. Bhakshua®



===== PAGE 243 / 300 =====

104 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.

I enter the heart of each one, and from me come memory,
knowledge, and reason. And I alone am to be known by all
the Vedas,” and I am the composer of the Ved4nta,* and also
the interpreter of the Vedas. These two spirits* (Purushas)
exist in the world,” the divisible and also the indivisible.
The divisible is every living being. The indivisible is said
to be that which pervades all. But there is another, the
highest spirit" (Purusha), designated by the name of the
Supreme Soul, which, as the imperishable master, penetrates
and sustains the triple world. Since I surpass the divisible,
and am higher also than the indivisible, I am, therefore,
celebrated in the world and in the Vedas as the highest
Person (Purusha), He who, not deluded (by the world),
knows me to be thus the highest Person (Purusha), knows
all things, and worships me by every condition.* Thus have

such as may be chewed, as bread; 2nd. Bhyjya, such as may be swallowed, as milk
or curda; 3rd. Lefya, what is licked with the tongue, as liquorice ; 4th. Choshya,
what is sucked with the lips, as jelly, ote.

7 These and the following words would seem to be a Bréhmanical exemplifi-
cation of the two preceding lines, To be known by the Vedas pre-supposes an
exercise of memory on the part of the student. ‘The Vedanta is a philosophical
treatise on the theology of the Vedas, and would therefore require knowledge of
the Supreme Being, etc.; while to interpret the Vedas, the reasoning powers must
be brought into fuil force. This explanation is undoubtedly fanciful, but it is
difficult otherwise to account for what is here so forcign to all that has gone
before. The whole shloka bears the stamp of a copyist’s interpolation, an idea
which is favoured by the change of metre in so sudden a manner.

28 ‘The name of a work and school of philosophy, the composition and found-
ing of which are ascribed, among many other works, to the Vyisa, Krishna
Dwaipayana, who compiled the Vedas. As we know it, the work, which also
dears the name of Uitara, or second Mimdnsd, bears internal evidence of being
considerably posterior to 'the Bhagavad-Gita, and cannot, therefore, be here
alluded to,” ‘The word, however (= veda + anta), means nothing more than the
“end of the Vedas,’ and might be given to any school or treatise which had the
expounding of the Vedic doctrines as its chief object. If this again be not meant,
we must take the word in the goneral sense of the ‘study of Vedio theology,’ and
the word Arit must be rendered ‘ institutor.’

%® Namely, the individual soul, here called divisible (shlokas 7—11), and the
universal vital energy, called the indivisible (shlokas 12—15),

% Put generally for the universe or matter, to which these two belong, and on
the existence of which their own individual existence depends.

31 He now speaks of spirit entirely indepondent of matter, and of this there is
but one form, the supreme, eternal, infinite, individual deity.

% Krishna again expressly identifios himself with the Supreme Being.

* 3 Whatever he does, in whatever condition of life, becomes a sacrifice to mo.



===== PAGE 244 / 300 =====

DEVOTION BY THE ATTAINMENT TO THE HIGHEST PERSON. 105

I declared, O sinless one! this most mystic science. A man,
if he knows this science, will be wise and do his duty, O
son of Bhérata !’

Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Fifteenth
Chapter, by name

‘DEVOTION BY THE ATTAINMENT TO THE HIGHEST PERSON.’

% The duty of his caste, Krishna takes care to bring all his teaching round to
the same point, the persuasion of Arjuna to fight, “


===== PAGE 245 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.'

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE. ‘

‘Fearlessness, purification of his nature, continuance in
devotion through spiritual knowledge, almsgiving, temperance
and study, mortification, rectitude, harmlessness, truth,
freedom from anger, indifference to the world,? mental tran-
quillity, straightforwardness,’ benevolence towards all beings,
modesty, gentleness, bashfulness, stability, energy, patience,
resolution, purity, freedom from vindictiveness and from
conceit,—these are (the virtues) of the man who is born to the
lot of the Devas, Bharata! Deceit, pride and conceit, anger
and abusivencss also, and ignorance, are (the vices) of him
who is born to the lot of the Asuras, O son of Prith4! The
lot of the Devas is considered conducive to final liberation,‘

1 This Chapter treats of that part of the doctrine of transmigration’ which
concerns the state immediutely after this life. ‘The deods performed on earth
affect a man’s soul in five ways, two of which arc bad and three good, or, as they
are here called, Sampad Asuri, or the infernal fate, and Sampad Daivt, or the
divine fate, ‘The two bad are as follows :—First. ‘Those who act badly are
despatched to the regions inhabited and presided over by the Asuras, the enemies
of the gods, the giants and demons of Hindi mythology, ‘These rogions are
limited, in philosophical works, to three—the regione of the Yakshas, Rékshasas,
and Pishichas, We havo also mention of Naraka as a general term.” (Seo
Chapter I. uote 36.) Secondly, they aro born again on earth in the bodies of
inferior men or of animals, The good first receive the kingdoms of the Devas as
their reward. ‘Theso are five in number. (See Chapter V. note 39.) Secondly,
after a sojourn in these regions proportionate to their merits, they are born again
‘on earth in the bodies of the superior in rank and virtue among men. But the
filth foto, higher than both of those, is tho objeet of philosophy —final emanci-
pation from material existence and union with the Supreme Being,

2 ‘Tydga means either ‘ abandonment of worldly interests,’ or simply‘ liberality.”
I have preferred the former es being the meaning more usual in philosophical
language. .

2 Pishuna, is a spy ; paishuna, the character of a spy, a taste for watching and
informing of the action® of.others ; apaishuna, freedom from such disposition. As
pishuna also means ‘cruel,’ apaishuna might be rendered ‘ clemency.”

« After a sojourn in the world of the Devas, the soul is again invested on earth
with the body'of the higher and superior among men, to whom the practice of


===== PAGE 246 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN REGARD TO THE LOT OF THE DEvas, ETC. 107

that of the Asuras to confinement (to material existence).
Grieve not, O son of P4ndu! thou art born to a divine lot.
In this world there are two sorts of natures in beings, that
of the Devas (divine), and also that of the Asuras (infernal).
The divine has been declared at full length.6 Hear from me
the infernal, O son of Pritha! Men of the infernal nature
do not comprehend either the nature of action, or that of
cessatior? from action. They possess neither purity, nor yet
morality, nor truthfulness. They deny that the universe has
any truth in it, or is really constituted, or possesses a Lord,® or
that it has arisen in certain succession,” or anything else, save
that it is there for the sake of enjoyment. Maintaining such
a view, their souls being ruined and their minds contracted,
baneful in their actions and hostile to the world, they prevail
for destruction. Indulging insatiable covetousness, filled with
deceit, pride, and madness, in their folly they adopt wrong
conceptions,’ and proceed, impure in their mode of life,—
indulging unlimited reflections that end in annihilation,?
considering the enjoyment of their desires as the highest
object, persuaded that such" (is life). Caught in a hundred.

devotion is easier than to others. On the other hand, after a sojourn among the
Asuras, it is invested with the body of some animal, or, at best, with that of an
inferior man, to whom the practice of devotion is almost impossible, and trans-
migration consequently more liable to onsue,

5 In the first three sblokas of this Chapter.

© They deny the truth of the creation and preservation of the world as taught
by the Vedas or the Schools of Philosophy. ‘They believe matter to be eternal and.
self-constituted, and are, in short, atheists of the most worldly and least intellec-
tual kind. This is, of course, said of the worldly, who are atheists by neglect,
indifference, and presumption, not of such reasoning atheists as Kapila,

7 'The regular succession of supreme spirit to nature, nature to manifest matter,
and of this last again in the philosophical order already described. This is the
translation of Schlegel. Wilkins and Galanos have followed the scholiasts in
an arbitrary explanation, which attributes to this compound the meaning of
‘produced by man and woman,’ and to kdmahaituka that of ‘caused by love.’
Lassen has so ably supported Schlegel's rendering that it would be superfluous
to reiterate here the pros and cons of the question.

® As to the nature and the object of the universe. .

® They support their false worldly views of the nature of things by speculative
reasoning, which really amounts to nothing at all. ‘The translators have mostly
very far-fetched interpretations of this simple compound.

10 Namely, kdmahaituka, or made for the sake of enjoyment.



===== PAGE 247 / 300 =====

108 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.

snares of false hopes, prone to desire and anger, they seek
abundance of wealth by improper means, for the sake of
pandering to their own lusts. “I have now obtained this
thing, and I will obtain that pleasure. I possess this wealth,
and that, too, I will yet possess. I have slain this enemy,
and I will slay others also. I am sovereign, I am enjoyer (of
the world). I am perfect, strong, and blessed. I am opulent,
and of noble birth. Who else is like me? I will saérifice, I
will give alms, I will slay.” Thus speak those who are
befooled by ignorance. Confused by many worldly thoughts,
surrounded by the meshes of bewilderment, devoted to the
enjoyment of their desires, they descend to foul Naraka."
Esteeming themselves very highly, self-willed, full of pos-
sessions, pride, and madness, they hypocritically worship
with nominal sacrifices, not according to ritual. Indulging
selfishness, violence, pride, desire and anger, detesting me
(who live) in their own and others’ bodies, revilers of me,—
such as these, hating (me), cruel, the lowest of men among
mankind, and wicked, I continually hurl into wombs of an
infernal nature.4 Having entered an infernal womb, more
and more deluded in every succeeding regeneration, they
never come to me, O son of Kunti! and hence they proceed
to the lowest walk.'* That gate of hell,’ which causes the
destruction of the soul,}8 is threefold—desire, anger, covetous-
ness. One should therefore abandon this triad. Liberated

11 See Chapter I. note 35.

12 This compound occurs in shloka 10, with the slight change of dambha for
dhana, It would be preferable to retain that reading here; but as we have no
authority for the change, we must explain dhana as alluding to the costly osten-
tation of their offerings.

18 Merely for the sake of ostentation, their hearts taking no part therein,
as Holy Writ enjoins.

14 In their repeated transmigrations, their souls aro invested with bodiés which
are considered of an infernal nature, as animols, insects, and inorganic matter.

18 The repetition of the substantive marks that of the act increasing in intensity.

% Junction with inorganic matter.
480 seed, beonuse they open Naraka to recive the soul, which gives way

em.
‘18 Tes debasement in the scale of bodies.


===== PAGE 248 / 300 =====

DEVOTION IN REGARD TO THE LOT OF THE DEVAS, ETC. 109

from these three gates of obscurity,'® O son of Kunti! a man
accomplishes the salvation of his soul, and thus attains the
highest path.” He who, neglecting the law of Holy Writ,
lives after his own desires, attains neither perfection, nor
happiness, nor the highest walk.*! Let Holy Writ be there-
fore thy authority” in the determination of what should be
done, and what not. Knowing that works are proclaimed in
the precepts of Holy Writ, thou shouldest perform actions.’
Thus in the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Sixteenth
Chapter, by name ~

‘ DEVOTION IN REGARD TO THE LOT OF THE DEVAS
AND THAT OF THE ASURAS,’

1 Another name of Narake,
2 Extinction in the Supreme Being.
,2 Devtstion on earth happiness inthe heaven ofthe Deities, and final eman-
cipation,
® Schlegel has shown, by numerous examples, that when the word pramdna is
used without a verb, the imperative astu, not the’ present asti, must be generall
supplied | He cies Hitopadesho, book i, line 114 (in Johnson's edition) en
ala iv, 13.


===== PAGE 249 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH.

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘But what is the state of those who, neglecting the or-
dinance of Holy Writ, worship, full of faith, Krishna? (Is it)
goodness, badness, or indifference P’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.
‘The faith of mortals is of three kinds. It springs from
each one’s own disposition? Learn that it is of the nature of
goodness, and also of badness and indifference. The faith
of each man is in accordance with his nature, O Bhérata !
Mortal man, who is gifted with faith, is of the same nature
as that (being) on whom he reposes his faith. The good

1 In Chapter XIV. an explanation has been given of the nature of the three

ualities which influence matter. ‘The subject is now resumed, and the object of
the present Chapter is to show how these qualities affect the religious feelings of
maokind generally, epart from the consideration ‘of the established religion.
Krishna does not reply dircetly to Arjuna’s question, but indirectly, by explaining
the nature of religious faith. \ He distinguishes its practical manifestation as o
three kinds: Ist. Sacrifice, which includes all worship, or the duty of man towards
God ; 2nd. Mortification, or self-government, his duty towards himself; 3rd. Alms-

‘ving, which includes all charity, or his duty towards his fellow-creaturo; and
shows the influence of each of the qualities on these exercises severally.

2 The disposition /swathdva) is, as we have already seen, the natural character
of a man, which inclines him to good, evil, or inertness in all that he does, and is
a mixture of the three qualities in difforont proportions,—a good disposition con-

‘ining more saftwa, or goodness, than badness or indifference; a bad one, more
badness, and 60 on. 4

+ The construction is here somewhat difficult, though the sense is cleat enough.
Taken in the order of the English, the Sanskrit words would stand thus, — Ayam
puru ho, yo (asti) shraddhdmayah, 80 (asti) sa eva, yachchhraddho (aati), «This
mortal, who is full of faith, he is that, indeed, towards which he is faithful.’ ‘The
usual construction in Sanskrit would be—Yah shraddhdmayo ayam puru ho
yachchhraddhah aa eva sah. Thus the first ea corresponds to the yat in yach-
chhraddhah, the second to the yah. Two words, however, in this line have an



===== PAGE 250 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS THE THREE KINDS oF FAITH. 111

worship the gods, the bad the Yakshas and Rékshasas. Other
men, being indifferent, worship the Pretas and Bhitas.‘
Know that those men who practise severe self-mortification,
not in accordance with Holy Writ,' being full of hypocrisy
and egotism, and gifted with desires, passions, and headstrong
will,—torturing the collection of elementary parts® which
compose the body, without sense, and torturing me’ also, who
exist in fhe inmost recesses of the body, are of an infernal
tendency. But even the food, which is pleasant to each (kind
of disposition), is of three kinds.® Sacrifice, mortification,
and almsgiving (are each of three kinds).? Hear the follow-

unusual force. Ayam, which at first sight appears to be redundant, on account of
the second sa, is really an attributive to Purugha, and marks that the latter word
was to be used in its commonest sense of man, the mortal, the united body and
soul existing on this earth, and not in its wider’ philosophical meaning of ‘spirit,’
as described. in Chapter XV. Again, the first sa has here the force of ‘such, of
such a kind, or nature,’ which renders the sense of the whole passage comprehen-
sible, This is explained by the very next shloka. If a man worship the gods,
whose nature contains a predominance of goodness, his own nature will contain a
like predominance. If he worship the Rakghasas, and rely on them, his nature is
@ bad one, and so on,

‘ These are two species of spirits which are fenerally mentioned together.
They both of them haunt cemeteries, and animate dead bodies, and their worship-
pers are of the lowest kind, since it is the blackest superstition and the meanest
fear only, which prompts their worship.

® He here deprecates all self-torture, except that which is practised in accord-
ance with Holy Writ, and which he explains in shlokas 14, 15, and 16. We are
inclined to think that the word skdstra, which we havo rendered generally by
‘Holy Writ,’ alludes here, and elsewhere in this Chapter, rather to the works
which were authorities for the Yoga system (c.g. Patanjali’s ‘oga-sstras), than to
the Vedas, which can scarcely be considered authorities for tl ‘ies of exercise,
The mortification here reprobated is that which affects the body only, while the
heart and mind still remain filled with lusts and passions, it being, like the long
fastings of the Pharisees, a matter of mere ostentation or self-interest.

© This is said generally of the body, and includes all the principal parts of the
more material portion of the body, the five grosser and the five subtler elements,
the senses, and the organs of action. Mere torture of the flesh, he says, is not real
mortification, but should be used as a means of acquiring control over the heart
and thoughts,—of self-government.

1 That is, the Supreme Being: but alluding rather to the vital energy than to
the soul itself, which could not be affected by the torture of matter. It alludes to
immoderate fasting, which destroys that vital energy.

* Namely : good, bad, and indifferent,

® This shloka is merely an announcement of what he is going to explain. He
is exemplifying the action of the three qualities on each mang disposition, and to
make the subject more clear, he takes the commonest and tnost homely example,—
that of food; and shows how each man’s disposition inclines him to a diferent
mode of life, even in the commonest affuirs.

15


===== PAGE 251 / 300 =====

burning, are the foods beloved by the bad, and cause pain,
grief, and disease. Whatever food is stale," tasteless, and
corrupted with rottenness, and even left (after a meal), or
impure, is the food preferred by those of the indifferent
quality. That sacrifice which is performed in accordance
with divine law by those who do not look selfishly for its
recompense, and who dispose their hearts to (the conviction)
that it is right to sacrifice, is a good one. But know that
that sacrifice, which is offered by those who regard its recom-
pense, and also for the sake of deceiving (by a false show of
piety), O best of the Bharatas! isa bad one. That which is
not according to law, and without distribution of the food,
without sacred hymns, without paying the priest,’ and
bereft of faith, they pronounce to be an indifferent sacrifice.
Honouring the gods, the Brahmans, the preceptors and the
wise, purity, straightforwardness, the vow of a Brahmachéri™
and harmlessness, are said to be mortification of the, body.
Speech which causes no excitement, which is truthful and
friendly, and also diligence in muttering prayers, is called
mortification of the mouth. Serenity of heart, gentleness,
silence, self-restraint, purification of one’s nature, this is

10 Lit.: ‘fat, oleaginous.?

1 Lit: ¢which has passed a watch,’ ‘which has-been cooked over-night.’
The night of twelve hours was divided into three ydmas, or watches of four
hours each.

1 The spirit of the Brébman here peers disgracefully through the mask of the
philosopher. Like the Jew of old, and the priest of modern days, and perhaps
more than either, the Brahman knew how to acquire and keop his portion of this
world’s goods, and his pay for the services he performed. For every officiatin
priest, a fee, in proportion to the style of the offering, was specially exacted, an
the offerer was enjoined to prepare a meal fur all the Brahmans who were present.

38 See Chapter VE. note 19. The allusion is here to the chastity and purity
undertaken by that vow.

1 Such as abuse, which excites anger; or indecent conversation, which excites

ire,


===== PAGE 252 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS THE THREE KINDS OF FAITH. 113

called mortification of the heart. This threefold mortification,
practised with extreme faith, by men who disregard the fruit
of their actions, and are devoted, is pronounced good. That
mortification which is practised for the sake of one’s own
good reception, honour, and respect,’ and in hypocrisy also»
is here 6 declared bad, fickle and uncertain. That mortifica-
tion which is performed by merely wounding one’s self, from
an erroneous view (of the nature of mortification)"’ or for
another’s destruction,* is called indifferent. A gift which is
given in a (right) place and time, and to a (fitting) person,
with the conviction that one ought to give alms, and to one
who cannot return it,?! is related as a good gift. But that
which is given for the sake of a gift in return, or, again, in
the expectation of its recompense, and reluctantly, is called a
bad gift. That gift which is given in a wrong place and time,

15 This proves the great esteem in which the Yogi must have been held even at
the period at which our author writes, since impostors could assume that character
as a means of being entertained and held in honour.

16 Ag Schlegel very properly translates it, ‘secundum rationem nostram.’

™ Under the impression that mortification merely consists in cutting and
wounding the flesh, without any subjection of the heart and passions, and that by
this means final emancipation may be reached,

18 Patanjali had taught that a severe and continuous system of mortification,
conjoined with meditation and self-subjection, was the means of acquiring super-
natural powers (vidjiti), and among these was that of cursing whomever one
pleased with immedinte effect. ‘The indifferent, then, having nothing but their
own sclfish objects in view, undertake mortjfication in order to acquire this power,
and thus to destroy their private enemics. Of course, however, they do not
succeed, from a want of the true spirit of that exercise,

19 Galanos, following the scholiast, explains the place to be any holy place, such
as Benares, and the time to be an eclipse, the eleventh day of the moon, the full
moon, or the morning. We confess we arc unwilling to attribute so much
Bréhmanical superstition to our philosopher, but can give no better explanation.
Compare Yajnavalkya, i. 6.

20 Patre is, lit., ‘in a fitting dish or receptacle.’ - Its sense is, however, deter-
mined by shloka 22, where it again occurs in the dative plural. The scholiast
would explain the locative as standing for the dative case ; but if we consider that
the person*to whom the gift is made is regarded as the receptacle in which it is
deposited, the locative is even more grammatically correct than the dative. Under
these circumstances we are surprised that Jassen, in his note, should prefer to
render it by ‘data justa occasion.’ .

21 ‘The Christianity of this sentiment may, perhaps, b8 somewhat modified by
what is said of the time and place.

2 The whole shloka is quoted in Hitopadesha, i. 15.



===== PAGE 253 / 300 =====

112 BHaGAVAD-Girk. CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH.

ing division of these. Those which increase life, vigour,
strength, health, happiness, and gaiety, and which are
savoury, rich,!° and substantial, are the pleasant foods dear to
the good. The bitter, acid, salt, too hot, pungent, sour, and
burning, are the foods beloved by the bad, and cause pain,
grief, and disease. Whatever food is stale,” tasteless, and
corrupted with rottenness, and even left (after a meal), or
impure, is the food preferred by those of the indifferent
quality. That sacrifice which is performed in accordance
with divine law by those who do not look selfishly for its
recompense, and who dispose their hearts to (the conviction)
that it is right to sacrifice, is a good one. But know that
that sacrifice, which is offered by those who regard its recom-
pense, and also for the sake of decciving (by a false show of
piety), O best of the Bharatas! isa bad one. That which is
not according to law, and without distribution of the food,
without sacred hymns, without paying the priest,!® and
bereft of faith, they pronounce to be an indifferent sacrifice.
Honouring the gods, the Brdhmans, the preceptors and tho
wise, purity, straightforwardness, the vow of a Brahmachéri!
and harmlessness, are said to be mortification of the, body.
Speech which causes no excitement,* which is truthful and
friendly, and also diligence in muttering prayers, is called
mortification of the mouth. Serenity of heart, gentleness,
silence, self-restraint, purification of one’s nature, this is

10 Lit.: ‘fat, oleaginous.”

11 Lit. ‘which has passed a watch,’ ‘which has beea cooked over-night
The night of twelve hours was divided into three ydmas, or watches of four
hours each.

2 The spirit of the Brahman here peers disgracefully through the mask of the
philosopher. Like the Jew of old, and the priest of modern days, and perhay
more than either, the Brahman know how to acquire and keep his portion of this
world’s goods, and his pay for the services he performed. For every officiatin
priest, a fee, in proportion to the style of the offering, was specially exacted, an
the offerer was enjoined to prepare a meal fur all the Brahmans who were present,

18 Bee Chapter VE. note 19. The allusion is here to the chastity and purity
undertaken by that vow.
gent Such as abuse, which excites anger; or indecent conversation, which excites

“desire.


===== PAGE 254 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS THE THREE KINDS OF FAITH. 113

called mortification of the heart. This threefold mortification,
practised with extreme faith, by men who disregard the fruit
of their actions, and are devoted, is pronounced good. That
mortification which is practised for the sake of one’s own
good reception, honour, and respect," and in hypocrisy also»
is here! declared bad, fickle and uncertain. That mortifica-
tion which is performed by merely wounding one’s self, from
an erroneous view (of the nature of mortification)” or for
another’s destruction,'* is called indifferent. A gift which is
given in a (right) place and time,!® and to a (fitting) person,”
with the conviction that one ought to give alms, and to one
who cannot return it,?! is related as a good gift? But that
which is given for the sake of a gift in return, or, again, in
the expectation of its recompense, and reluctantly, is called a
bad gift. That gift which is given in a wrong place and time,

18 This proves the great esteem in which the Yogi must have been held even at
the period at which our author writes, since impostors could assume that character
as a means of being entertained and held in honour.

18 As Schlegel very properly translates it, ‘secundum rationem nostram.’

1 Under the impression that mortification merely consists in cutting and
wounding the flesh, without any subjection of the heart and passions, and that by
this moans final emancipation may be reached.

18 Patanjali had taught that a severo and continuous system of mortification,
conjoined with meditation and sclf-subjection, was the means of acquiring super-
natural powers cibiiti), and among these was that of cursing whomever one
pleased with immedinte effect. ‘The indifferent, then, having nothing but their
own selfish objects in view, undertake mortjfication in order to acquire this power,
and thus to destroy their private enemies, Of course, however, they do not
succeed, from a want of the true spirit of that exercise.

19 Galanos, following the scholiast, explains the place to be any holy place, such
as Benares, and the time to be an eclipse, the eleventh day of the moon, the fall
moon, or the morning. We confess wo ar. unwilling to attribute so much
Brahmanical superstition to our philosopher, but can give no better explanation,
Compare Yajnavalkya, i. 6.

20 Patre is, lit., ‘in a fitting dish or receptacle.’ Its sense is, however, deter-
mined by shloke 22, where it again occurs in the dative plural. ‘The scholiast
‘would explain the Iocative as standing for the dative case; but if we consider that
the person*to whom the gift is made is regarded as the receptacle in which it is
deposited, the locative is even more grammatically correct than the dative. Under
these circumstances we are surprised that Iassen, in his note, should prefer to
render it by ‘data justa occasione.’ .

11 The Christianity of this sentiment may, porhaps, bb somewhat modified by
what is said of the time and place.

2 The whole shloka is quoted in Hitopadesha, i. 15.


===== PAGE 255 / 300 =====

114 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH.

and to the unworthy, without the proper attentions, and
disdainfully, is pronounced an indifferent gift. .Om, Tat,
Sat,* this is related as the threefold designation of the
Supreme Being. By him were the Bréhmans, and Vedas,
and sacrifices instituted of yore. Therefore the rites of
sacrifice, alms, and mortification, enjoined by divine law, are
always commenced by theologians, by pronouncing the word
Om. (With the conviction that the Deity is) tat," the various
rites of sacrifice, mortification, and almsgiving are per-
formed * by those who desire final emancipation, without con-
sideration of the reward (of their actions).2” That word sat
is used in reference to reality and goodness. And the word
sat is likewise used in (reference to the) performance of a

23 Such as embracing and washing the feet.—Galanos.

% These three words occur in the Vedas, and are there explained as designating
Brahmé, ‘They are together equivalent to the mystic phrase, ¢a¢ twam ai, ‘thou
(the Supreme Being) art that (whole universe)” the Om! as that by which the
Deity is invoked, corresponding to twam, and sat to asi. The sentence indicates
the Deity in his relation to the universe, and marks his divinity in the Om! his
universality in the ¢af, and his external existence in the sat. For an explanation
of Om! sce Chapter I. note 1, at, the neuter of the demonstrative pronoun,
signifies ‘all that,’ all that exists,—the universe. Sat, the present participle of
the verb as, ‘to be,’ marks the existence and eternity (noted by the present tense)
of the Om ! and its connection with the tat. Besides the meaning of ‘existent,’
at has also that of ‘real,’ and it denotes the real existence of the Supreme Bein;
contrasted with the finite, and therefore unreal existence of matter. The whol
Bassage seems to be nothing more than a conscience offering to the outraged

rahmanism, and an attempt to authorize the established doctrines by a species of
mystic philosophical terminology, having for its object the exaltation of the
Brahmans, the Vedas, and the established rites. We have more than once said
that the plan of our author was conciliatory, and that he wrote at a period when
contempt had been profusely heaped upon the hierarchical institutions, and this
one of the passages which seem to support us in our assertion,

35 Namely, at the creation.

% Lit., By those who speak of the Supreme Being, that is generally those who
understand and impart their knowledge of the truth of things. It probably refers
to the philosophers especially, but may refer generally to all learned theologians.

= «That all,’ viz. the whole universe, everything which exists.

% From the conviction that the Supreme Being is everything, they perform
sacrifices to him in the persons of the deities according to the Established Religion ;
‘but not with the selfish motives that generally prompt the adherents to the law,
bat only from love of the Supreme Being.
den Fins! emmnepation not being the reward of thete actions but obtained by

levotion.

% Lit., ‘existent.’ Hence really existent, real ; and since what is real is good,
as opposed to what has only the appearance of reality, it also means good,



===== PAGE 256 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS THE THREE KINDS OF FAITH. 115

landable action, O son of Prithé! A quiescent state™ of
sacrifice, mortification, and almagiving, is called sat. And
also action,®' on account of these (rites), is denominated sat.
Whatever sacrifice, almsgiving, or mortification is performed,
aud whatever action is done, without faith, is called asat,3
O son of Prithé! Nor is that (of any use) to us after death or
in this life,’

Thus tn the Upanishads, etc., (stands) the Seventeenth
Chapter, by name

‘DEVOTION AS REGARDS THE THREE KINDS OF FAITH,’

st ‘These two words are strongly contrasted. ‘These three things, worship, self-
control, and charity, are not necessarily actions in tho usual acceptation of the
word, but may be mental conditions, during which tho body is guiewent, He says
that they aro called good (sat/ when actually performed, when the person actually
offers victims to the gods, or tortures his flesh-or gives alms to fitting objects ; but
they are no less so when mentally performed, when the devotee who prefers rest to
action, offers his pure thoughts as a sacrifice, keeps his body beneath the control
of his soul, or maintains a benevolent sympathy towards all beings,

33 In opposition to those mentioned in shloka 27, which are done, as we are
told in shloka 26, by those who desire final emancipation, ete, and therefore
with faith, .

% The opposite to sat, lit,, ‘not existing,’ thence unreal, dad,


===== PAGE 257 / 300 =====

CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘I wish to learn, O great-armed one! the nature of re-
nunciation (of actions), and of disinterestedness (in actions),?
Krishna! separately, O slayer of Keshin |’

THE HOLY ONE SPOKE.

‘The sages® know that the rejection of (all) actions which
have a desired object, is Renunciation. The learned call the
disregard of the fruit of every action, disinterestedness, Some
wise men‘ say, “ An action must be avoided like a crime,” and
others® say, “The action in sacrifice, almsgiving, and mortifi-
cation should not be avoided.” Hear my decision in this
matter as to disinterestedness, O best of the Bharatas! ‘For it
is said, O first of men! to be of three kinds.6 The action in

' In this Chapter he re-establishes and certifies the principal and favourite
doctrines of the Bhagavad-Gita, enunciation of action is the watchword of this
system, but not inaction, only the abandonment of all interest in the action, and
of all care as to its result. ‘The two principal kinds of action are religious action,
as sacrifice, ete., and duty, or fulfilment of the obligations of the station in which
one is born. All other kinds of action can only have some specific interested
object in view, and are, therefore, to be renounced. ‘This having been established,
he proceeds through the remainder of the Chapter, beginning at shloka 12, to
explain the nature of action and all connected with it, From shloka 22 he shows
the influence of the three qualities on all things.

? Compare Chapter V.

3 See Chapter IV. note 17.

“ Kapila and his disciples.

* Particularly those of the Mim&ns& School, who relied on the actions enjoined
by the Vedas. o,

® According to the three qualities, though, of course, that of the sa¢twa quality

«was the only true one.
%


===== PAGE 258 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION. 117

sacrifice, almsgiving, and mortification should not be avoided.
It should be practised only. Sacrifice, alms, and also morti-
fication, ate the purifications? of the wise. But such actions,
indeed, must be practised after having rejected selfish
interests and their consequences. Such, O son of Prithé! is
my certain and supreme decision. Again, the renunciation of
@ necessary ® action is not right. The rejection of such an
action is» said to be from folly and of the quality of indif-
ference? If! one abandon any action, merely alleging that
it is difficult, from fear of personal annoyance, he practises
renunciation under the influence of badness, and would not
receive the reward of renunciation. If one perform a neces-
sary action, convinced that it must be done, Arjuna! putting
aside self-interest and the fruit also (of his action), that dis-
interestedness is deemed good. The disinterested man, filled
with goodness and with contemplation, and free from doubts,
is not averse to unprosperous, nor attached to prosperous
action. For it is impossible for actions" to be entirely
abandoned by a mortal; but he who is not interested in the
result of actions is called disinterested. The result of actions
of three kinds, unwished for, wished for, and mixed,!” accrues

7 The external visible forms of the internal spiritual purification. Sacrifice
was the visible form of worship, which is the purification of the mind : almsgiving,
of charity, which is the purification of the heart; and mortification is the puri
cation of the flesh.

® That is, belonging to one’s duties of caste.

® Since sloth and laziness were part of indifference.

1 As Schlegel remarks, the neuter relative is here ungrammatical, and we
should spect the masc. yas from the sa which follows. Yat, however, is found in

all the MSS., and we must therefore consider it as indefinite, and supply ‘if,’ to
express the hypothesis implied in the subj. tense of ¢yajet. ‘The same holds good
for the next shloka,

11 The construction is here somewhat irregular. Shakyam is the neut, of the
fut. part, pass. of sliak, ‘to be able,’ and the passive meaning contained in it must
de transigrred in English to the inf. tyaktwm, as is often the case with this
auxiliary. But instead of karmdni in the acc. plural, governed by tyaktum, we
should naturally have expected Aarma in the nom. sing. as subject to shakyam,
‘As this, however, is not the case, we must consider shakyam to be here employed
indefinitely. .e

1 That is, unpleasant, pleasant, and what is partly Composed of each. ‘Those
who on this’earth perform actions without entire absence of interest in the con


===== PAGE 259 / 300 =====

118 = BHAGAVAD-GiTA, CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

after death to those who do not renounce actions, but not any
result to those who do renounce. Learn from me, O hero!
the following five principles of action declared in the Sénkhya
(doctrine), and necessary for the completion of every action—
the prescribed method, the agent,!* and the instrument of the
particular description required,!* the different movements ® of
the particular kind for each, and Divine will!® also as the
fifth. These five requisites (attend) every action which a man
undertakes, whether proper or improper, with his body, his
voice, and his heart.7 This'® being thus, he who regards
himself only 1 as the actor, by reason of his mental imperfec-
tions, is wrong-minded, and does not really see aright. He
whose disposition is not egotistical, and whose mind is not
polluted,” does not kill, even though he slay yonder people,
nor is implicated! (in the bonds of action). Knowledge, the
thing to be known, and the person who knows, constitute the
threefold incitement to action.” The instrument, the act,

sequences, receive those consequences after death, according to their merits. ‘The
wicked go to Naraka, the good to Swarga ; those who have been neither very good
nor very bad, are born again on earth at once. Those, however, who do renounce
all such interest obtain final emancipation.

18 ‘The person himself, or, in a wider sense, the mind.

14 ‘The organs of action, as hands, feet, ete., or the senses.

18 ‘The action of the sonses and organs.

we Hf the Sankhya here mentioned refer either to Kapila's or Ishwara Kyighpa’s
writings, this word should be translated ‘ circumstance, destiny,’ since they do not
recognize a Divine will.

17 Here generally for the senses, over which the heart /manas) presides.

18 Mark the unwonted use of ¢atra, as the loc. sing. of the pronoun tad, without
any meaning of place, but agreeing with sati in the loc. absolute. In all proba-
bility this locative originally ended in ¢ra rather than emin, until, from its constant
use to denote place, the older form came to be used independently, and the later
one was substituted for it,

W Forgetting that four other things are requisite to the performance of every
action.

2 Js not perverted and defiled by false doctrine.

21 Galanos, misled by what is said in Chapter IT. 19, 20, translates, ‘und is not
killed,’ from the root “to kill,’ which, however, does not occur in the con-
jugational tenses.

32 The object of this life is the emancipation of the soul from material existence,
which is effected by the arquirement of knowledge, that is, of true spiritual know-
ledge of the real nature of all things; and this is acquired by the connection of
‘the soul with the universe by means of the body, The soul therefore is the



===== PAGE 260 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION. 119

and the agent, are the threefold collection of action.*
Knowledge, and the act, and the agent, are also declared
in three’ ways, according to the difference of the three
qualities. Hear these also, properly, in the enumeration of
the qualities. Know that that knowledge, by which one
perceives a single imperishable principle of existence in all
things, not separate in separate objects, is good, But
that khowledge which perceives in all things, on account
of their individuality, various individual principles of ex-
istence,* is bad. But that knowledge which attaches to
one object (to be performed), as if it were everything, and
does not recognize the true cause of (existence),” which is
not possessed of the real truth,* and is mean, is called in-
different. That action which is necessary,” free from self-
interest, done without love or hatred by one who is regardless
of its reward, is said to be a good action. But that action
which is performed with great exertion, by one who desires
some pleasant object, or, again, is egotistical, is called a bad
one. One undertakes an action from folly, without regarding
the consequences, the loss, the harm (it may do), and his own
power (to carry it out), that is called indifferent. (One who
acts) free from self-interest, without self-praise, with per-

parijndtri, the spectator of the universe within the body, whose object is to com-
Prebend the universe and the nature of things, which is therefore the jneya, the
Object of knowledge, which, being the means, is judna.

23 Action, that is, the whole action of life, by which this knowledge is acquired,
itself consists of threo components corresponding with these. Karma, ‘the thing
to be done,’ answers to jneya, ‘the thing to be known;" karana, ‘the means,’ to
Jnina ; and kartri, ‘the agent,’ to parjjndtri.

™ Which izes the fact that all individual souls belong to the same great
spirit, all individual life to the same universal vitality, all individual bodies of
matter to the same material essence, and all of these consequently to the Supreme

35 Which believes things to be as they at first appear, independent and distinct.

% Which believes the sole object of life to be the particular one which it
has marked out for itself; such as the acquirement of wealth, etc.

47 Ts ignorant that final.emancipation is the reason of our existence on earth.

%® Does not recognize the existence of a Supreme Béing, and the temporary
nature of matter.

3 Such as the rites of religion and the duties of caste,


===== PAGE 261 / 300 =====

120 = BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

severance and resolution, and unchanged in success and failure
alike, is called a good agent. (One who acts) with passion,
who is desirous of the reward of his actions, covetéus, cruel
by nature, impure, liable to joy and grief, is proclaimed to be
a bad agent. (One who acts) without ability, without dis-
crimination,» who is obstinate, negligent, slothful, despond-
ing, and dilatory, is called an indifferent agent. Hear the
distribution of intellect and also of perseverance into three
parts, according to the qualities, explained in full and separ-
ately, O despiser of wealth! The intellect which comprehends
the nature of action and of cessation from action, and what
should be done and what not, danger and security; and
understands implication by actions and liberation from it,3!
is a good intellect, O son of Prithé! That intellect by which
one takes a wrong view of right and wrong, of what should
be done and what not, is a bad intellect, O son of Prithé!
The intellect which thinks wrong to be right, enveloped in
obscurity, and believing all things to be just the contrary (of
what they are), is an indifferent intellect, O son of Prithé!
The perseverance by means of which one resists the actions of
the heart,3? the breath,* and the senses, with exclusive
devotion, is good perseverance, O son of Pritha! But the
perseverance with which one cherishes, from self-interest
only, duty,® pleasure, and wealth, being desirous of their
fruits, is bad perseverance, O son of Prithé! The perseverance
by which one fails, with foolish mind, to shake off sleep, fear,
anxiety, despondency, and also rashness, is indifferent per-

% Lit., ‘common,’ that is, regarding everything from a common point of view,
‘dopting common mode of wetion, not varying with th nature of the thing to be
done. ‘This rendering, in which Tam supported by Walkine and Galanos, is far
better adapted to the context than ‘itis,’ by which Schlegel has translated it.

3 Knows that when actions are undertaken from interested motivgs, thi
implicate the actor in their consequences; and when not, ho is fro from suck
obligations.

32 The passions and desires.

%9 Seo Chapter IV. rtote.33.

% Fixed on one object, the Supreme Being only.

«5 In the hope of heaven.


===== PAGE 262 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION. 121

severance, O son of Prithé! But now learn from me the three
kinds of pleasure, O chief of the Bharatas! That in which
one experiences delight, from being habituated, and arrives
at an end to pain,—whatever is first like poison, but in the
end similar to ambrosia,®* is called good pleasure, sprung
from the serenity of one’s mind. Whatever is at first like
ambrosia, from the connection of the senses with the objects
of sens@, but in the end is like poison,” is called bad pleasure.
And that pleasure which, both at first and in its consequences,
is a cause of the bewilderment of the soul,® arising from
sleep, sloth, or carelessness, is called indifferent pleasure.
There is no nature® on earth, or again among the gods in
heaven,? which is free from these three qualities, which
are born of nature. The offices of Brahmans, Kshatriyas,
Vaishyas, and Shidras, O harasser of thy foes! are dis-
tributed according to the qualities which predominate in the
dispositions of each. Tranquillity, continence, mortification,
purity, patience ; and also rectitude, spiritual knowledge, and
spiritual discernment,’ belief in the existence of another
world, comprise the office of a Bréhman, sprung from his

3% Such as the restraint of the senses and mortification, which is at first painful
and difficult, but at Jength induces a pleasant feeling of satisfaction.

37 Since pleasure received through the senses can last but a short timo, and its
cessation is of course painful; while, if too much indulged, it produces satiety,
disgust, and discase.

38 Since it hinders the soul from obtaining a just view and knowledge of the
nature of things, .

% ‘The innate nature or character of everything.

© This and other Passages of our poem determine What position the deities of
mythology held in the cosmology of the earlier Aryan philosophers. Since the
influence of the qualities can affect matrer only directly, and soul indirectly,
through the medium of the body, it is evident that these deities were considered,
like man, os individual souls, invested with material bodies, though necessarily of
a superior kind to those of mortals. Thus all beings, from Brahms himself down
to the lowest development of matter, is liable sooner or later to destruction, and
nothing is really immortal and immaterial but the Supreme Being and the soul
which emanates from him. Compare Séukhya-Kérikt, shlokas 63, 64, and 65;
and Kapila’s Sinkhya-Pravachana, book iii, sdtras 42, 43, 44, etc.

1 See Chapter VII. note 2.

«2 Astikya, derived from asti, third person singular of present tense of as ‘to
be,’ is explained by the scholiast by asté paro loka iti nischayah, ‘ the conviction
that there exists another world.’


===== PAGE 263 / 300 =====

122 BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

disposition. Valour, glory, strength, firmness, ability in
warfare, and also keeping one’s ground, liberality, and a
lordly character, are the office of a Kshatriya, sprung from
his disposition. Agriculture, herding of kine, and commerce,
are the office of a Vaishya, sprung from his disposition.
Servitude is the peculiar office of a Shidra, sprung from his
disposition. Each man who is satisfied with his own office
attains perfection, Now hear how he attains perfeCtion, if
satisfied with his own office. If a man worship him from
whom all things have their origin, and by whom all this
universe is created, by performing his own duty, he attains
perfection. It is better to perform one’s own duty, even
though it be devoid of excellence,* than (to perform) another’s
duty well. He who fulfils the office obligated by his own
nature does not incur sin. One should not reject the duty to
which one is born, even if it be associated with error,*! for all
(human) undertakings are involved in error, as fire is by
smoke. He whose thoughts are not attached (to the world),
who is self-governed in everything, and free from desires,
attains, by means of renunciation, the highest perfection of
freedom from action.’ Learn from me, merely briefly, how
one who has attained perfection attains to the Supreme

4 Bee note 36 on Chapter ITI, 35, where this arddba-shloka occurs. Compare
also Manu, x. 97.

Arjuna in the commencement has maintained that his duty as a Kyhatriya
was now a crime, since it compelled him to fight with his own near relations.
Krishna cannot deny this, but insists that the consideration of one's duty outweighs
all others; and if it be a crime to slay one's relatives, itis equally, and even more
40, to reject one’s duty by not doing so,

4 Threo stages of the life of the good are about to be distinguished. First, the
attainment of worldly perfection by upright performance of the datiee of one's
caste, Second (ehlokas 5154), attainment, by devotion, of « mental union with
the Supreme Being, equivalent to jivanmuktt. Third, final emancipation of actual

ritual union with the Supreme Being (shlokes 66,57). ‘This perfection is then

¢ first stage, and is described as perfection of freedom from action. By this,
however, it is not meant that the devotee ceases to act, or that it is even unneces.
sary for him to perform*his-duties ; but merely that, in this state, he is free from
, the responsibility entailed on other men by their actions, when undertaken with a
specific object.


===== PAGE 264 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION. 123

Being,“ which is the highest condition of spiritual know-
ledge. Gifted with a pure mind, and restraining himself
with perseverance, having rejected (the charms of) sound and
the other objects of the senses,‘? and cast off love and hate,
frequenting solitary places, eating little, having subdued his
body and his heart, intent on the practice of contemplation,
always endowed with apathy ; when he has cast away egotism,
violenc8, pride, desire, anger, and avarice, and is free from
selfishness and calm, he is fitted for the condition of the
Supreme Being. When he is in a condition for the Supreme
Being, and his spirit is serene, he neither regrets nor hopes.
Alike to all beings, he attains to the highest state of devotion
tome. By means of this devotion, he learns truly how great
and what I am. And when he has learned to know me
truly,® he enters me without any intermediate condition.”
And though at any time he perform any kind of action, if
he flees for refuge to me, he attains, by my grace, the eternal
imperishable region.»' Having, by reflection, reposed all thy
actions on me, intent on me, exercise mental devotion con-
tinually, and think on me (alone). Thinking on me, thou
wilt,, by my favour, overcome all difficulties. But if, from
self-conceit, thou wilt not -hearken, thou wilt perish. If,
indulging self-confidence, thou thinkest, “I will not fight,”
that resolution of thine is vain. Thy nature® will compel

+ Not actually, but mentally, being in a state of jfanmukts or mental union
with the Supreme Being (eco Chapter V. note 38), in which he is perfected in
Knowledge as he was in actions in tho preceding stage.

41’ Lit,, The objects of sense which have sound as the firet—the objects, namely,
which severally affect each of the five senses—sounds, sights, smells, tastes, and
things which are touched. The system of Yoga here alluded to is that mentioned
in Chapter IV. 26, note 29. The devotee rejects such charms as music, female
deauty, perfumes, pleasant food, ete., by retiring into the jungle beyond their reach,

‘© Rince true kuowledge was the most direct means of fnal emancipation.

Without an intermediate sojourn in heaven and regeneration on earth,

% Actions of any kind oblige regeneration in other cases ; but accompanied by
devotion, and in this condition, they have no effect.

* Union with the Supreme Being. e

mAs a targa fin ina eins of eure fd honour, hich, wl

event thee ym quittir ie battle-field as a cows or allowin; to.
Fiffer by thy refusal to defend them, 6 My party


===== PAGE 265 / 300 =====

124 BHAGAVAD-ciTA. CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

thee to do so. Tied down by thine own duty, which springs
from thy disposition, O son of Kunt{! thou wilt, even against
thine own will, do that which, in thy folly, thou wouldest
not do. The lord of all things dwells in the region of the
heart, Arjuna! and by means of his magic, causes all things
to whirl round, mounted, as it were, on a circular engine.
Seek this refuge, then, in every state of life, O son of
Bharata! By its grace thou wilt attain supreme tranquillity,
the everlasting region. I have thus expounded to thee
knowledge more secret than secret itself. Having deliberated
fully on it, do as thou pleasest. But further hear from me
my supreme words, most secret of all. Thou art very much
beloved of me, and therefore I will tell thee what is good.
Place thy affections on me, worship me, sacrifice to me, and
reverence me. Thus thou wilt come to me. I declare the
truth to thee, Abandoning all religious duties ; seck me as
thy refuge. I will deliver thee from all sin. Be not anxious.
Thou must not reveal this (doctrine) to one who does not
practise mortification, nor to one who does not worship at any
time, nor to one who does not care to hear it, nor to one who

S The heart was the supposed seat of the soul and the vital enorgy, both of
which are portions of the Supreme Being; but the latter of which only is here
alluded to.

% The universe is not inaptly compared to a machine, set in motion by the
Supreme Spirit, and continuing so by means of his magie, which is natur, the
universal principle of life, and which once set in motion produces all things
according to fixed laws.

5 The Supreme Being.

% Schlegel has rendered this compound by ‘omni reverehtia,’ which does not
suit the sense of the passage hulf so well, while it necessitates an unusual use of
saroa, which generally presupposes multiplicity of objects, kritena being used for
a divisible whole.

® The repetition of the me would seem to imply an emphasis intended to dis-
tinguish Krishna himself as identified with the Supreme Being, and declare that
identification to be the last but most important dogma of the whole ‘system.
Otherwie this and the following shloka would be mere tautology.

8 The sense of parityajya is determined by the words sharanam oraja, which
aro contrasted with it.» Hg does not mean that Arjuna should actually lay aside
and neglect the duties inculcated by the established religion, but that he should
cease to place his reliance upon them ; that he should execute them as duties, not
as a means of salvation, :



===== PAGE 266 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION. 125

reviles me. He who shall deliver this highest mystery to
my worshippers,” if he perform the greatest worship of me,
will thus come to me, no doubt. And there will be none
among men who will do me better service than he, nor will
another than he be dearer to me on earth. And if any one
study this sacred conversation held between us two, I shall
consider that I am worshipped by him, with a sacrifice of
knowledge. And the man who should even only hear it
taught, with faith and not reviling, may even, being freed
from evil, attain the regions of the upright.“ Hast thou

% Having delivered to Arjuna the whole Yoga system, he now enjoins him to
promulgate it. But to whom? Not to the first comer, not to one who may deride
‘or abuse it—for this it is too holy, too mystic—but to the religious man, who,
already prepared by a practice of asceticism (of the object of which he is in
ignorance, but which he derives from the Brahmanical religion), is fitted to receive,
appreciate, and make a right use of it. ‘This shloka teaches us many things. It
proves the Brahmanical reserve of our oct philosopher. It proves his fear of con-
troversy. It proves that though the Kshatriya and Vaishya might be initiated in
these doctrines along with the Brahman himself, that initiation must be performed
with care. Not every one, not the ignorant and superstitious public, could receive
this enlightenment, which might throw contempt and doubt upon the established
religion, and perhaps urge them to subvert it; but a chosen few, to whom the
consideration of their salvation was superior to that of any worldly object, and
who therefore would not convert it into a tool for revolutionary purposes. Our
poem must then have been written cither before or after the religious revolution
of Buddha, at a period when the hierarchy were supreme in power, and science
and philosophy were forced, as in the days of Galileo and the Inquisition, to cre
in by stealth. How different from the Buddhists, who boldly met the priesthoor
in an open field, and proclaimed what thcy believed to be the truth to the whole
world without restriction! But this very caution in the promulgation of his
doctrines may, as in the case of Descartes, be taken as an earnest of the belief of
our Philosop jer in what he taught. Probably warned already by the defeat of
Buddhism, his policy was to conciliate the Brihmanic party, and to graft his new
plant quickly on the old stock, rather than scck to uproot the latter. But the last,
‘words of the shloka throw more light than any other passage on the probable date
of our poem. ‘The ‘me’ must be understood to allude to the Supreme Being in
his personification as Vishnu, or Krishna only, and none can be meant by his
«revilers,’ but the worshippers of Shiva, the Shaivyas, who were in constant con-
troversy with the Vaishnava party. Our author then must have lived at the
period when the battle between these two factions was hot, and when that epoch

1as been determined, some approximation will have been made to the date of the
composition of the Bhagavad-Gita.

© Yolis of the Vaishnava school,

® Beware of coupling tena with jndnayajnena, as it refers to the person repre-
sented by ya.

© For a defence of the emendation /mukto (a) shubhillokdn for muktah
shubhdliokdn), which I have here proposed and adopted, see my edition of the text
of the Bhagatad-Gith, It is here only necessary to mention that the regions of
the upright refer, not to the mansion of the Supreme Being, but to the five worlds



===== PAGE 267 / 300 =====

126 = BHAGAVAD-GiTA. CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

heard all this, O son of Prith&! with thoughts fixed on this
only? Is the delusion of ignorance ® dispersed for thee, O
despiser of wealth ?” .

ARJUNA SPOKE.

‘My delusion is destroyed ; and by thy favour, Divine One!
I have recovered my senses, I remain free from doybt, and
will do thy bidding.’

SANJAYA SPOKE.

‘Thus did I hear this miraculous and astounding * con-
versation between Vasudeva and the magnanimous son of
Prithé! By Vy4sa’s favour I heard this supreme mystery—
devotion—from the lord of devotion, Krishna himself, who
expounded it openly: and remembering again and again,
O King! this wonderful sacred colloquy between Keshava
and Arjuna, I am again and again delighted. And® re-

(loka) of the deities, mentioned in Chapter V. note 39. The senso of the whole
passage is then as follows:—In shlokas 68 and 69 he speaks of the man who,
perfectly comprehending and following the precepts of this system, undertakes to
transmit them to the worthy, ‘This ean only allude to Brihmans, whose ofice was
instruction; and the reward specified is final emancipation. In shloka 70 he
speaks of the man who reads and studies these doctrines, alluding either to the
young Brahman student, or to the Kghatriya, both of whom were able to read and
employ the Sanskrit language, No reward is specified but as such an one is eon,
sidered as a worshipper of Krishna, though he does’ not say ‘ practically,” but
merely ‘by the sucrifee of knowledge,’ we may presume that final emancipation
would be the reward, though after a greater or less number of transmigrations.
Lastly, in shloka 71 he speaks of the man to whom these doctrines are verbally
‘transmitted, and this can only allude to those who could not read Sanskrit, the
Vaishya, and perhaps even the Shidra, and females, who used the Prikyit dialect.
For these the reward is not final emancipation, either immediate or eventual, but
one of te five heavens, according to their practical merits. Compare Chapter IX.
}2 (note).

© The false idea that it was wrong to fight, which resulted from ignorance of
the true nature of action.

“ Lit, Causing the hair to stand on end.

© Tf the cha here inserted after Arishydmi connects the whole sentence with
the preceding one, it'is at least misplaced. If not, another verb must have
orgiely existed in the first half of the shloka, and the reading has been carelessly


===== PAGE 268 / 300 =====

DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION. 127

membering again and again that very miraculous form® of
Hari, my wonder is great, and I am again and again
delighted? Wherever Krishna, the lord of devotion, and
wherever the son of Prithé, the archer, are; there are
fortune, victory, and power certain, This is my opinion.’

Thus in the Upanishads of the Bhagavad-Gité, in the
knowledge of the Supreme Being, in the Book of Devotion,
in the Dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, (stands) the
Eighteenth Chapter, by name .

‘ DEVOTION AS REGARDS EMANCIPATION AND RENUNCIATION.”

4 Which was displayed to Arjuna, as described in Chapter XI,

16


===== PAGE 269 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 270 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES.

[Norror.—In the following Index some slight attempt has been made to
classify the Principal personages according to their historical position, Thus
three Periods of Mythology havo boen distiaguished: Ist. The Vodie; ad. The
Epic; and 8rd. The Puranic. The Vedic period includes, among the Gods,
chiefly the personifications of the powers of one Supreme Being ; and those of the
elements and natural phenomena, as the Maruts, Indra, ete.; and among the

ersonages, the semi-divine, as tho Rishis. ‘The Epic period includes the semi-

vine, as Manu; and the heroic personages, as Arjuna, ete. The Pur&nic con-
tains chiefly new deifications of ideal creation. So little has been written, and so
little is known correctly about Hind Mythology, that the exactness of this classi-
fication cannot in many instances be vouched for; and, at the same time, it must
be remembered, that, while a personage, who belongs to the Vedic, may often also
belong to the Epic and Purtnic periods, and one who belongs to the Epic, also to
the Puranic period, his character and position will, of course, be materially dif-
ferent in each : and neither the limits we have prescribed ourselves, nor the object
of this Index, will admit of delineating these changes minutely. We need only
add, that as regards mythological allusions, the Bhagavad-Gita belongs solely to
the period which we have distinguished as Purdnic.]

ADITYA.—[1.] The Sun, in which sonse it occurs in V. 16; VIL 9; XV. 12.
[2.] The twelve solar dynasties or personifications of the Sun under a different name
and sign of the Zodiac in each month of the year. Like the Vasus, they belong to
the earliest period, and may probably be referred to that ante-Vedic age, when
the worship of the elements, and particularly of the Sun, was first enriched and
extended by fancy. In the Vishnu-Purina, p. 134, their names are thus giv
—Dhétri (presiding over the month Madhu, or Chaitra, March-April), Aryaman,
Mitra, Varuna, Indra, Vivashwat, Pashan, Parjanya, Anshu, Bhaga, Twayhtri,
Vishnu. At p. 122 they are Vishnu, Shakra, Aryaman, Dhati, Twashtri, Pashan,
Vivashwat, Savitri, Mitra, Varuna, Anshu, and Bhaga. All these, it will be
observed, are names of the Sun itself, with the exception of Indra, Parjanya and
Shakra, all names for the same being, the personification of rain and thunder;
‘Varuna, water; and Vighpu. The exceptions may be accounted for by the stormy
or rainy nature of the months over which they preside. In X. 21 Vishnu (pre-
siding over the month Madhu) is said to be chief of the months, perhaps because
the month over which he presided was the commencement of Spring, and there-
fore oné of the pleasantest. From this passage it would thus appear that these
names were in use before the Purinic period. XI. 6 and 22. (The name is said
to be a matronymic from Aditi, the mother of the gods, the daughter of Dakgha,
and wife of Kashyapa.) fa

AIRAVATA.—The King of Elephanta, upon which Indra rides; the elephant
of the north quarter, produced at the churning of the ocean (see Vishnu). X. 2%



===== PAGE 271 / 300 =====

180 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

‘The name is to be derived from irdvat, ‘ watery ;’ and may either alinde to the
north, as the quarter whence rain comes, or to the original idea of s cloud, on
which Indra, the King of Clouds, is mounted, and which, therefoye, would be
called his elephant. Lastly, Wilson refers it to the fact of his being produced
from the watery ocean. He belongs to the Purapic age.

ANANTA (otherwise called Shesha, or Visuki)—The King of the Nagas, 8
race of serpents, which inhabit Patala. He belongs purely to the Purtipic period,
and in Vishnu-Purfina, p. 226, is described as having a thousand hooded heads,
on the forcheads of which was inscribed the sign called Swastika, the mystic cross
which betokens good fortune. Ile is clothed in purple, and wears a white necklace.
In one hand he holds a plough, in the other a pestle. At the end of cach Kalpa
he vomits venomous fire, which destroys all creation. Ho bears the universe on
his head, and produces earthquakes whenever he yawns. On his body Vishnu
reposes, and is sheltered by his hoods, which stretch out above him like a canopy.
He proved a very useful personage at the churning of the ocean: the gods seizing
his head and the demons his tail, they twisted him round Mount Meru, and thus
formed a churn on a large scale, (The name means “ Endless.”) X. 29.

ARJUNA.—The third of the five sons of Pandu by his wife Kunti or Prithé,
who, however, received amatory visits from the gods Dharma, Vayu, and Indra,
who are therefore put forward as tho real fathers of Yudhishthira, Bhima and
Arjuna, in order to give these heroes a divine origin, Arjuna is therefore ealled
the son of Indra, When banished with his brothers from Hastinfpura by his
aged blind uncle, Dhritarashtra, at the persuasion of his son Duryodhana, Krishna
was moved to pity at his outcast lot, and becamo his bosom-friend, and it is
Detween these two that the colloquy which forms the subject of our poem takes
place. His other names are Partha and Kaunteya (matronymics from his mother),
the son of Bharata, the best of the Bharatas, the best of the Kurus, the harasser
of his foes, the strong-armed one, the despiser of woalth, Gudékesha, Savyastichin
(the left-handed one), Kapidwaja (whose standard is an ape), and Kiritin (wearing
a tiara), for which sce Chapter I. 15 (note). He belongs, of course, to the Epic
period.

ARYAMAN.—The chief of the Pitris (see Pityi). X. 29. (Name derived from
drya, ‘ excellent.’)

ASITA.—A Rishi, mentioned in X. 13, of whom we know nothing more.

ASURA.—A general name for all the giants and demons who composed the
enemies of the gods, and the inhabitants of Patala; and a special designation for
a class of those of the first order. They belong, in the wider sense, to the Epic,
in the more special sense to the Purinic, period. In the latter they are fabled to
be sprung from Brabmé's thigh (Vishnu-Puréna, p. 40), and to be the sons of
Kashyapa, by Diti and Dandyu. As in the earliest period the Suras were per-
sonifications of light, so the Asuras wero probably those of darkness; and the
original idea of the existence of malignant and terrible beings may thus be traced
to the fear that man experiences in darkness, from the conviction that bo is sur-
rounded by creatures which he cannot see, in short, ghoste or goblins. (The word
is derived from a, privative, or rather negative, and sura, ‘a deity.") XI. 22,

ASHWATTHAMAN.;-The son of Drona and Kript, whence he is also called
Draupi. One of the leaders of the Kuru party. (Derived probably from ashtea,
‘g horse,’ and sthdman, ‘strength,’ meaning ‘as strong as a horse.’) I. 8.



===== PAGE 272 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPEI NAMES. 131

ASHWINAU.—This name, only used in the dual number, is derived from
sha, ‘a horse,’ and means the ‘two beings of the character of a horse.’ Now
this animal pas with most eastern nations been the type of the Sun, probably on
acount of the swiftness with which the Day-god appears to move across the
heavens. Accordingly, in the earliest period, the Ashwinau appear to have been
the children of the Sun, wedded to Night, and personifications of the morning and
evening twilight, which, from their likeness to one another, were considered as
twins. In the Epic period we lose sight of their original character, and find them
as the beautiful twin sons of Sirya, the Sun, the physicians of the gods, and
bearing the names of Ntsatya and Dasra. In the Purfnic period they are called
the cons of Sdrya and Sanjnd, his wife, daughter of Vishwakarman ; who, being
unable to support the heat of his desires, gave him her handmaid Chh&yé, or
Shade, as a wife in her place, and assumed the form of a mare, whence she is
called Ashwini. Ho, however, discovered the fraud ; and, in the form of a horse,
approached his wife, who afterwards gave birth to the Ashwinau, We need not
examine this legend further, to be convinced that it was composed by the mytho-
logists in order to account for the name of these Indian Dioscuri. XI. 6,22. See
also Vishnu-Purina, pp. 266, 437.

BHARATA.—[1.] The son of Dushyanta and Shakuntalé, the story of whose
birth forms the plot of the well-known and beautiful play of the dramatist
Kélidjsa, called ‘Shakuntalé,’ and who was supposed to be the first king or
emperor of the whole of India. See Mahbhér. i. 74, 3117; and Vishnu-Purtna,
p. 449. [2.] A general name for the whole Aryan race, and afterwards for the
inhabitants of the Indian Peninsula, which is thence called Bharatavarsha. In
oth cases the name belongs to the Epic period, and I should conjecture that it
had originally been that of some Aryan tribe, whose conquests or numerical
majority had spread their name over the whole continent, (It is commonly
derived from the root déri, ‘to sustain,’ and as referring to the monarch is
rendered ‘ the sustainer,’ which derivation we are forced to accept while waiting
for a better.)

BHARATA—A patronymic from Bharata, applied to Arjuna as his descen-
dont, as in II. 14, 18, 28, 30, etc. ; and to Dhritarashtra, in I. 24, and II. 10,
‘Arjuna is also called Princo of the Bharatas, III. 41; VII. 11, 16; VIII. 23;
XIII. 26; XIV. 12; XVIII. 36; and best of the Bharatas in XVII. 12, and
XVIII. 4.

BHIMA.—The second of the five sons of Pandu, but mystically begotten by
Vayu, the god of the wind or air, through his mother Kunti, or Pritht. He is the
principal general of the Pindava army, is renowned for his strength and swift
ness, and in I. 15, is said to be of dreadful deeds and wolfish entrails. He is
otherwise called Bhimasena. I. 4, 10; Vishnu-Purtina, pp. 437, 459. (The name
is an adjective, meaning ‘ terrible.’) He belongs exclusively to the Epic period.

BHISHMA (otherwise called Devavrata and Géngeya).— Shéntanu, a king
descended from Kuru, was father of Bhishma, by the river Gang or Ganges. He
was aft€rwards married to Satyavati, and through her begot Vichitravirya, who
married Amba and Ambaliké, the daughters of a King of Kashi (Benares), but
died of consumption from indulging too freely in connubial rites. His mother,
Satyavati, before her marriage with Shantanu, had by Rarfshara, a son called
Krishna Dwaiptyana, the last of the Vyésas (ee Vyésa), who married the two
widows of his half-brother, Vichitravirya, and begot Dhyitardghtra, the father of ,



===== PAGE 273 / 300 =====

182 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

Duryodhana and his hundred brothers, and Pépdu, the nominal father of the five
Péndavas. Thus Bhishma is half-brother to Vichitravirya, who is half-brother
to the Vytsa, who is grandfather of the principal characters in the two contending
parties, He may therefore be considered as great-uncle to Duryodifana and the
‘Phpdavas. At the time of the war he was the oldest warrior in the field, and to

- him was therefore entrasted the generalship of the Kuru army. He belongs
exclusively to the Epic period. I. 8, 10, 11, 26; II.4; XI. 26, 84; Vighpu-
Purina, p. 459. (The name signifies ‘ terrifying,’ from dhiph, the causative form
of Bhi, ‘to fear.’)

BHRIGU.—A Rishi, chief of the Maharshis (see Righi). Also one of the ten
Prajapatis, sons of Brahmé and progenitors of mankind, and teacifer of the
Dhanurveda, or science of war, one of the Upavedas. As such he belongs to the
Vedic period. In the Purknic period he is called the husband of Khyéti, or
Fame, the daughter of Daksha, by Prastti. X. 25; Vishu-Purdna, pp. 49, 284.

BHUTA.—Malignant spirits, goblins or ghosts, haunting cemeteries, lurking
in trees, animating dead bodies, and deluding and devouring human beings. They
are generally coupled with the Pretas, and in this character belong to the Epic
period. In the Purdnic period they are personified as demigods of a particular
class, produced by Brahm& when incensed; and their mother is therefore con-
sidered in the Padma-Purana as Krodha, or ‘ Anger,’ and their father, Kashyapa.
XI. 25; XVIL.4; Vishnu-Purina, p. 150, note 18. (The word means lit. ‘a
living being,’ from bhi, ‘to be.)

BRAHMAN.—In the ante-mythological age this was probably nothing but a
name for the Sun, considered as producer, vivifier, and pervader. He afterwards
replaced Sarya in the triad of elementary gods, and was coupled with Vishnu
and Shiva, who were substituted for Varuna and Vayu, the other components of
that triad. In the earliest mythological period, Brahmé (always masculine) is
then the first person of the triad, Brahm&, Vishnu, and Shiva; and when later
the unity of these personages was established by referring them to one Supreme
Being, Brahm& was that being in his character of creator and enlivener, Vishyu
in that of preserver, and Shiva in that of destroyer. Thus in the Purhnas
(Vishpu-Purfina, p. 22), BrahmA is said to live 100 of his own years, each of
which consists of 360 days and nights, The days are called Kalpas, and consist
of 4,320,000,000 years of mortals, during which the universe existe. During
his nights the universe ceases to exist, and is reproduced at the commencement of
the next day or Kalpa (see note on Chapter VIII. 17). He is described in the
Purhpas as having four faces, and as being produced from the cup of a lotus,
which sprang from the navel of Vishnu. In his mythological character of
creator of the universe, he is mentioned in VIII. 16, 17; and XI. 15, 37;
Vishnu-Purfa, pp. 19, 22, 34, 44, and 14, note 22. When, after the period of
superstitious mythology, the idea of one Supreme Being was again brought
forward, Brahmé was considered the chief of the existing trinity, and was at first
identified with that idea of an unknown God; and though afterwards Shiva and
‘Vighou were each in turn identified with the Supreme Being by their respective
followers, the Shaivas and Vaishnavas, the name Brahma, in the neuter, wes still
retained in the language of philosophy to designate the universal Supreme One.
In this sense the word occurs throughout our poem with the exception of the
four places mentioned abovb, where it is masculine ; and also of Chapter XIV. 8

« (6ee note), where it occurs in the neuter, but no longer signifies the Supreme


===== PAGE 274 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, 133

Being in his complete character of the essence of both spirit and matter; but
merely that portion of him which is the essence of all matter, the universal vital
energy. We have thus :—Ist. Brahms, masculine, the mythological personage,
first person of the mythological triad, and personification of the creative power,
considered as a mortal and material deity; 2nd. Brahma, neuter, a name used to
designate the Supreme Being in philosophic language; and 3rd. Brahma, neuter,
the personification, in later philosophical language, of the material portion of
the Supreme Being. (The word’has never been satisfactorily derived, though
commonly supposed to come from the root vrih, ‘to grow or increase.’)
BRAHMASUTRA.—Seo note on XIII. 4. (From Brahma (neuter), ‘the
Supreme Being,’ and sutra, ‘ a philosophical aphorism,’)
CHEKITANA.—A king allied to tho Pindavas. I. 6. See Mah&bhér.
¥. 160, 6101; v. 166, 6325; ii. 23, 963; v. 18, 577. -
CHITRARATHA.—Tho chief of the Gandharvas, or heavenly musicians.
X. 26; Vishpu-Puréna, p. 153, note; Mah4bhir. iii. 45, 1801, where he is
called Chitrasena. (From chitra, ‘ variegated, beautiful,’ and ratha, ‘a chariot.’)
DAITYA.—In tho Epic period the Daityas appear to have been personifica~
tions of the aborigines of India, more particularly of the southern part of the
Peninsula; who, to increase the glory of the heroes who conquered them, were
represented as giants and demons. ‘They are always associated with the Dénavas,
who bear the same character. In the Purdnic period they play a very important
part, as the enemies who aro constantly at war with the deities, for the sake of
obtaining the sovereignty of heaven. They are there considered as the sons of
the five sons of Hiranyakeshipu, who again is son of Kashyapa and Diti (from
whom the name Daitya is called a matronymic). At the churning of the ocean
they attempted to seize the cup of Amrita, or ambrosia, which was then pro-
duced ; but being defeated by the gods, they fled to Patéla, which they inhabit.
Hiranyakeshipu was their king, but, when deposed by Vishnu, his son Prahlada
received the sovereignty. X. 30; Vishnu-Purina, pp. 77, 123, 124 (note 28),
126, 335, 398, and 493; Mahabhér. i. 65, 2625. (Said to be » matronymic
from Diti, their great-grandmother.)

DANAVA.—A class of mythological giants, generally coupled with the last
(Daityas), and belonging to the Epic period as personifications of the aborigines ;
to the Purdnic as the inhabitants of Patala, and enemies of the gods. In the
latter they are called the children of Kashyapa and Danu (whence their name is
& matronymic). In Vishnu-Purina, p. 147, the following twelve names are
given them, but they do not throw any light on their peculiar features :
Dwimérddh6, Shankara, Ayomukha, Shankushiras, Kapila, Samvara, Ekachakra,
‘Térake, Swabhénu, Vrighaparvan, Puloman, and Viprachitti. X. 14; Mahabhar,
i, 65, 2530. (A matronymic from Danu.)

DEVALA.—A Rishi, son of Krishtshwa. X.13; Vishpu-Purins, p. 123;
Colebrooke's Essays, vol. ii. p. 6.

DHBISHTADYUMNA.—The son of Drupada, very skilful in warfare, and
one of the generals of the Pandavas. I. 17; Mah&bh. v. 160, 6100. (From
ahrigha, ‘bold and dyumna, € strength, power.’)

DHRISHTAKETU.—King of Chedi, son of Shishupéla, and ally of the
‘Péndavas, and one of their generals. I. 5; Mahabli. v. 18, 576; v. 156, 5324;
¥. 49, 2010; and v, 170, 6900. (From daripia, ‘bold’ and etu, ‘a standard.” 5



===== PAGE 275 / 300 =====

184 BHAGAVAD-GiTh.

DHRITARASHTRA.—The elder son of Kyighna Dwaiphyans and the widow
of Vichitravirya (see Bhishms), King of Hastingpura (commonly identified with
the modem Delhi), and father of Duryodhana and his ninety-nine brothers. Being
Dlind from birth, he eventually delivered his sceptre to Duryodhana, at whose
suggestion he banished the Pandava princes, his own nephews, from his kingdom.
It is to him that his charioteer and bard (wita), Sanjay, relates the present
Gialogue between Krishpa and Arjuna, having received, as he says, from the
‘Vy6sa, the mystic power of being present while it was carried on. His wife's
name was Gandhési, and the chief of the hundred sons which she bore him were
Duryodhana, Duhsh6sana, Vikarpa, and Chitrasena. I. 1; XI. 26; Mahsbhar.
i, 96, 3804; i. 101, 4085; i. 102, 4135; i, 110, 4372; i. 106, 428@. (From
dhrita, ‘held firm) and rdsktra, ‘a kingdom,’ ‘who tenaciously maintains the
sovereignty.’ The name, as Schlegel observes, may have arisen from his remain-
ing on the throne in spite of his blindness.)

DRAUPADY (otherwise called Kyighn4 and Panchéli).—Danghter of Drupada,
sister of Dhrishtadyumna, and wife of each of the five P&mdava princes. By
Yudhighthira she had a son Prativindhya; by Bhima, Satasoma or Shrutasoma ;,
by Arjun, Shrutakirti; by Nakula, Shaténika; and by Sahadeva, Shrutasena
or Shrutakarman, I. 6,18. (Patronymic from Drupads.)

DRONA.—Bon of the Rishi Bharadwaja, by birth a Brahman, but acquainted
with military science, which he received as a gift from Parashurame (ee Réma).
He was instructor of both parties in the art of war, and is on that account called
an Gchérya, In Vighpu-Purina, p. 454, he is called the husband of Krips, and
father of Ashwatthiman. I. 2,3, Afterwards King of the north part of the
Panch6la country, and a general in the Kuru army. I. 26; II. 4; XI. 26, 34.

DRUPADA (otherwise called Yajnasena).—Son of Prighata, father of Dhrigh-
tedyomna, Shikhandin, and Krishna (Draupadi, or Panchili, wife of the sons of
Péndu), King of the Panchtias, and one of the generals of the Péndava army.
Being conquered by Drona, he only managed to retain the southern part of his
Kingdom, from the Ganges to Charmavati (mod. Chumbal), including the’ cities
Mékandi and Kampilya. I. 3, 4, 18; Vishnu-Purtna, p. 455; Mahabb. i.
138, 6609 ; i. 180, 6109, etc. (From dru, ‘a tree,’ and pada, * foot, or root” (?).)

DURYODHANA.—The eldest of the hundred sons of Dhyitarhghra, and the
second in command of the Kuru party, Bhishma being first in command.
persuading his father Dhritaréshtra to banish his cousins the Péndavas from the
Kingdom of Hastinipura, he was the original cause of the great war. I. 2.
(Name derived from dur, ‘ bad,’ and yodhana, ‘fighting,’ that is, ‘having bad reasons
for making war.’)

GANDHARBA (sometimes written Gandharva).— A species of demigods or
angels, the musicians of Heaven, inhabiting Indraloka, the paradise of the
deities, and witnesses of the actions of men. ‘They are sixty millions in number.
In the creation of the second Manwantara, they are called the children of Arisht&
and Kashyapa (whence they are sometimes called Mauneyas, children of the Muni,
viz, Kashyapa). By them the Nagas, or mythological serpents, in the fegions
below, were despoiled of the jewels which decorate their heads. ‘They applied to
Vishnu, who sent Purukutaa to Patila to destroy the Gandharbas. They originally
belong to the later Epjo period, but figure more prominently in the Purkpas,
X. 26; XI. 22; Vishpu-Purina, pp. 41, 150, 370; Mahdbhér. i. 66, 2650.
No satisfactory derivation has been given for this name. In Vishpu-Purépa it



===== PAGE 276 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 135

is anid to be equivalent to gdn dhayantas, ‘suckling the goddess of speech ;’ and
another derivation no less ridiculous is that in Wilson's Dict., ganda, ‘ smell,’ and
arb, ‘to go alluding to the musk-deer, for which this word is a name. Its
primitive meaning was probably that of some singing-bird, as the Koil, or Indian
cuckoo, and this sense is attributed to it in the Medint Kopha.)

GANDIVA.—The name of a miraculous bow, which Arjuna received as a
present from Agni, the god of fire. I. 30; MahGbhér. i. 265, 8177, ete.; iv. 42,
1826, ete.; v. 167, 6360, etc.

GAYATRI.—The holiest verse of the Vedas, not to be uttered to ears profane,
but recityl only mentally. It is short prayer to the sun, identified with the
Supreme Being. It occurs in the 10th hymn of the 4th section of the ard
Aghtaké of the Sanhita of the Rigveda :— Tat savitur varenyam bhargo devasya
dhimahi dhiyo yo nah prachodaydt : ‘We meditate on that excellent light of the
divine sun; may he illuminate our minds.’ Rigveda, iii. 4, 10. Such is the fear
entertained of profaning this text, that copyiste of the Vedas not unfrequently
refrain from transcribing it both in the Sanhith and the Bhishys. Wilson,
Vishpu-Puréna, p. 122, note 13. This hymn, ascribed to Vishwimitra, is pro-
perly the only Gayatri; but, according to a system of the Tantrikas, a number of
mystical verses bear the same name. It is usually personified as a goddess, wife
of Brahm&, and metaphorical mother of the first three castes. X. 35; Rosen's
*Rigvedae Specimen’ (London, 1830), p. 13; Colebrooke's Misc. Essays, vol. i.
Pp- 30, 127, 175, 309. (It appears to be the fem. of some obsolete word gdyatra,
derivable from gai, ‘to sing.’)

GOVINDA.—A name of Krishna, who was brought up in the family of Nanda,
a cowherd (se Krishna). I. 32; II. 9; Vishpu-Purina, p. 629. (The word
means a ‘ cow-keeper,’ from go, ‘a cow,’ and vid, 6th class, ‘ to obtain.’)

HARI.—A name of Vishnu, as to the origin of which we know nothing. XI. 9;
XVIII. 77; Vishpu-Purdna, p. 7, note 1.

HIMALAYA—The well-known range of mountains which form the northern
barrier of the Indian peninsula, containing the highest elevations in the world.
Tho Imaiis or Emodus of classical writers. In mythology Himélaya is husband
of the Apsaras or air-nymph Menaké; father of the river Gang& and of Durgh,
or Um, in her descent as Parvati to captivate Shiva, and seduce him from the
austerities which he practised in those mountains. In this personification the
name belongs to the Purinic, as a mountain only to the Epic period. X. 25.
(Derived from /ima, ‘ snow,’ and dlaya, ‘a house,’ ‘ the home of snow.’)

IKSHWAKU.—The son of the lawgiver, Manu Vaivaghwata. Considered
to be the first prince of the Solar dynasty ; he reigned at Ayodhy& (mod. Oude)
in the second or Trets Yuga. He had one hundred sons, and is said to have been
orn from the nostril of Manu when he happened to sneeze. IV. 1; Vighnu-
Purhna, pp. 348, 359; RémGyana, i. 70,20. (In the fem. the name signifies a
gourd or cucumber; and is said to be applied to this king on account of his
numerous progeny. But?)

INDRA.—This deity plays an important part in each of the threo periods of
Indian mythology. In the earliest ages he seems to have been the unknown
mysterious being who inhabited the sky, the firmament between earth and the
sun, who rode upon the clouds, who poured forth the rain, hurled the forked
lightning upon earth, and spoke in the awful thunder. His character was at onge



===== PAGE 277 / 300 =====

186 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

Deneficent as giving rain and shade; and awful and powerful in the storm. He
is the original of the Jupiter Tonans of the west, and the Thor of the north, and
like them rose in the earliest ages to the first place, and the 807 ity among
the gods. Fear, a stronger motive among men than gratitude, raised hina above
the elementary triad. In the Epic period he is the first person of the pure
mythological triad, Indra, Agni, and Yama, In the Purtnic age, when the
powers of a Supreme Being were personified in the superior triad of Brahms,
Vighpu, and Shiva, Indra’s star declines, He is no longer the principal divinity,
but only the chief of the inferior deities; and, as such, is dt constant war with
the giants and demons, by whom he is for a time deposed. A curse from the
Rishi Durvise causes his power and that of the deities subject to him gradually
to decline; and he is defeated by Krishna in a fight for the Parijéta tree, which
had been produced at the churning of the ocean, and planted by Indra in his own
garden. An amusing account of this battle is given in Vighnu-Purfpa, p. 687.
‘His wife's name is Shach{. He is lord of the eight Vasus (see Vasu). ‘The sage
Gautama pronounced upon him the curse of wearing one thousand digraceful
marks, which he afterwards turned to eyes. He ravished the daughter of Pulo-
man, whom he slew to avoid his curse. He is borne on a white horse. Tho
rainbow is supposed to be his bow bent for the destruction of his foes, and thunder-
bolts are his weapons. The heaven over which he rules, and which the other
secondary deities inhabit, is, in the Epic ago, called Swarga, and later, Indraloka,
or Devaloka. His horse is Uchchhaihshravas; his elephant, Airavata; his city,
Amarkvati; his palace, Vaijayanta, ‘These details belong to the Purnic age.
‘X. 22. See Monier Williams's Eng.-Sansk. Dict. He is also the guardian of the
eastern quarter. Ram. i. 36; Vishnu-Purina, pp. 70-78, 411, 623. (Commonly
derived from a root id or ind, ‘ to govern.’)

JAHNAVI.—A name of the sacred river Ganges. X.31. It isa patronymic
from Jahnu, an ancient and celebrated Muni, who, being at his devotions on the
bank of the sacred stream, was disturbed by its overflowing. In his rage, he
exercised that supremo power, which the austeritios he had practised gave him ;
swallowed the whole river, and was only persuaded by the entreaties of the Gods
‘and sages to vomit it forth again; whence it obtained the name of the daughter
of Jahnu. The fable is of course invented to explain the name. Vishnu-
Purfna, p. 398.

JANAKA (otherwise called Siradhwajas, ‘the bearer of a plough as an ensign’).
—He was King of Mithilé, or Videha, remarkable for his wisdom and sanctity,
and therefore enumerated among the Réjarshis. III. 20. He was the father of
Shité, the wife of Dasharatha (se Rama), the heroine of the Raméyapa, and
the Helen of India, The legend of her birth is, that while Janaka was plough-
ing the ground in order to accomplish a sacrifice for progeny, the maiden sprang
up, ready-made, from the furrow. It must undoubtedly be understood historically
to allude to the improvement of agriculture in the south of India by a king of
those regions. Videha is a district in the province of Berar, the same as the
ancient Mithilé, and modern Tirhut. Wilson's Vighnu-Purana, p. 390, note 4.
‘This king must not be confounded with his ancestor of the same namé, about
whose birth from the body of Nimi such absurd legends are related (Vighnu-
Purfga, p. 389), in order to explain the names Videha and Mithila. (The name
means 8 ‘ progenitor, om angestor.’)

JAYADRATHA (or Varddhakehatri)—Son of Vriddhakshatri, and king of the
“Siodhavas, Sauviras, or Shivis, and a general in the Kurn army. XI. 34;



===== PAGE 278 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 137

Mahsbhér, iii, 263, 16681, 16618, 16621; v. 164, 6274. (Derived from jayad,
pres. part. of ji, ‘to conquer,’ and ratha, ‘a car,’ ‘having a victorious car.’)

KANDARPA (or Kéma).—Tho God of Love, the Cupid of India. In the
Epic period he seems to be morely the abstract idea, poetically personified, not a
mythological personage ; and wherever he is introduced, it is as a passion affect-
ing the heart by directing the glances of the lover. In the Purtpic period he is
called the son of Brahmé, produced from, and inflaming his heart; but this is
evidently invented to explain one of the derivations. He is sometimes called a
son of Dharma, the god of justice; of Shraddha, the goddess of faith; or of
Vishnu, by his wife Lakehm{, or Rukmin, the Venus of India. He is repre-
sented as beautiful boy, bearing five flowery arrows, each tipped with a different
blossom, which affects one of the five senses, and a bow of flowers with a string
of bees, riding on e parrot, attended by Apsarases, or air-nymphs, of whom he is
the master. X. 48. (Derived sometimes from ka, ‘Brahms,’ and drip, ‘to
inflame, sometimes from the root kam, ‘ to love,’ and darpa, ‘ pride,’ ‘ the pride of
loving” But?)

KAPILA.—A celebrated anchoret, to whom the founding of the Sankhya
school of philosophy is attributed. A work pretending to be written by him is
still extant: it bears the title of ‘Stnkhya-Pravachana,’ or ‘Preface to the
Snkhya Philosophy,’ and was printed at Serampore in 1821. The great reverence
in which Kapila was held may bo presumed from the fact that he is sometimes
considered as an incarnation of the god Agni, or fire (Mahibh. iii. 220, 18298),
and sometimes of Vasudeva, or Vishnu himself. (MahGbhar. iii. 47, 1896;
Ram. i. 41, 26; Vighpu-Purina, p. 378. In this last place there is a long story
about his destroying by a single look the sixty thousand sons of Sagara, who
troubled the world with their sins; but it is evidently made up to explain how
the word Kapila also means a horse.) In X. 26 of our poem, he is spoken of as
the chief of the Siddhas. (The word means ‘tawny,’ and Colebrooke, Misc.
Essays, vol. i. p. 229, conjectures that his connection with Agni may have
originated in this meaning of his name.) He seems to belong only to the
Purknic period.

KARNA.—King of the Ange country, a general in the Kura army, son of
Sérya (the Sun), and Kunti (the mother of tho Pandavas), before her marriage
with Pandu. He was exposed by his mother on the banks of the Ganges in a
basket, and being found by Adhiratha, an Anga monarch, was by him adopted
(a legend possibly owing its origin to the Hebrews). He is therefore called
a Sita (charioteer and bard), a caste sprung from a Kehatriya father and a
Bréhmani mother, since the Anga kings were of that caste, being descended from
‘Vijaya, whose mother was a Sat (the children always belonging to the maternal
caste). I. 8; XI. 34. In XI. 26, he is referred to as a Sataputra, the son of a
charioteer. Vighpu-Purina, pp. 437, 446.

KASHI, or VARANASI, is the modern Benaros. I. 6, 17. The king
mentioned in the first place as Kishi-rija, in the second as Késhya, which is
perhap@ a patronymic from Kasha (see Vishnu-Purina, p. 406), was an ally of
the Pandavas,

KESHIN.—A Daitya, or giant, who was slain by Krishna, who is on that
account called Keshinishadana, tho slayer of Keshin (see Krighna). Kansa,
learning from Nérada thet Krighpa and Balarima were still alive, sent the
demon Keshin, who haunted the forest of Vrinddvan, in the form of a horse, to



===== PAGE 279 / 300 =====

138 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

destroy them by trampling them down. Krishna, however, stuck his:arm into
his jew, and thus throttled him. XVIII. 1; Vighpu-Puréna, p. 639. (Keshin
means ‘hairy,’ and evidently refers to the horse; but whether the Jogend were
invented to explain the name, or vice-versd, is not decided.)

ERIPA.—King of the Panchélas, son of Satyadhyiti, and brother of Kripl,
the wife of Dropa, who is also called Gautam{ and Shéradhwati, and was the
mother of Ashwatthiman. He is one of the Kuru generals. 1.8; Vighnu-
Purhna, p. 454. Satyadhyiti was in love with the Apsaras Urvashi, and two
children were the product of their connection, Santana, a RAj&, discovered the
infants when on a hunting expedition, lying in a clump of Shara grass, took
them, and brought them up. They received their names, Kripa and K¢ipi, from
the compassion (kripd) which he showed them in thus preserving their lives.
The legend is, of course, a Purinic invention, to explain the origin of their
names.

ERISHNA.—The most renowned demigod of Indian mythology, and most
celebrated hero of Indian history, is the eighth Avatéra or incarnation of Vishnu.
He cannot be said to belong really to the Epic age, but almost exclusively to the
Purinic. When the story of his life is divested of the marvellous, he will be
found to be an historical personage, belonging to that epoch when the Aryan
race, leaving the north-western corner of the peninsula, began to make their way
by gradual conquests towards the interior and the east. The enemies whom he
attacks and subdues are the aborigines of the interior, who, to heighten the glory
of the hero, are called giants and demons, Daityas and Danavas. ‘The Aryans
were still a nomad people, pasturing their herds of cattle at tho foot of the
Himéleya range and in the plains of the Panjab; and the legend would further
lead us to believe that the primitive elementary worship now yielded to the more
systematic religion of Brihmanism and the institutions of caste. His identifica-
tion with Vishnu would follow as a natural apotheosis of a monarch and warrior
of suck fame; but the very legend itself, even as it is given im the Purknas,
seems to show that he existed long before the mythological triad of Brahma,
Vishnu, and Shiva had ever been dreamed of. As it is from the mouth of this
Indian Hercules that our system is expounded, we cannot refrain from giving a
curtailed account of his birth and actions, borrowed partly from the Purénas,
partly from Monier Williams's Eng.-Sansk. Dict., and partly from a little work of
great usefulness, lately published by M. Pavie, now Professor of Sanskrit in the
University of France, entitled ‘Krichna et sa doctrine,’ Paris, 1852.—The King
of the Daityas or aborigines, Xhuka, had two sons, Devaka and Ugrasena. The
former had a daughter named Dovaki, the latter a son called Kansa, Devakt
was married to a nobleman of the Aryan race named Vasudeva (or Anaka-
dundubhi), the son of Shara, a descendant of Yadu, and by him had eight sons.
‘Vasudeva had also another wife named Rohini. Kansa, the cousin of Devaki,
was informed by the saint and prophet Narada, that his cousin would bear a son,
who would kill him and overthrow his kingdom. Kansa was King of Mathur&,
and he captured Vasudeva and his wife Devakf, imprisoned them in his own
palace, set guards over them, and slew the six children whom Devaki had Slready
borne. She was now about to give birth to the seventh, who was Balarama, the
playfellow of Krishna, and, like him, supposed to be an incarnation of Vighyu
(see Rama); but by'divinesagency, the child was transferred before birth to the

Womb of Vasudeva's other wife, Rohini, who was still at liberty, and was thus
sored. Her eighth child was Krighya, who was born at midnight, with « very


===== PAGE 280 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 139

black skin (the name Kyighpa, as an adjective, means ‘ black’), and a peculiar
curl of hair called the Shrivatea, resembling a Saint Andrew's cross, on his breast.
The gods naw interposed to preserve the life of this favoured baby from Kanse’s
vigilance, and accordingly lulled the guards of the palace to sleep with the Yoga-
nidra, or mysterious slumber. Taking the infant, its father Vasudeva stole out
undiscovered as far as the Yamun4, or Jumna river, which seems to have been
the boundary between the Aryans and the aborigines. This he crossed, and on
the other side found the cart and team of a nomad Aryan cowherd, called Nanda,
whose wife, Yashods, had by strange coincidence just been delivered of a female
child, Vasudeva, warned of this by divine admonition, stole to her bedside, and
placing Fgighna by her, re-crossed the river, and re-entered the palace, with the
female baby of Yashod4 in his arms, and thus substituted it for his own son. When
Kansa discovered the cheat, he for a while gave up the affair, and set the prisoners
at liberty, but ordered all male children to be put to death. Vasudeva then
entrusted Krishna to the care of Nanda, the cowherd, who took him to the village
of Gokula, or Vraja, and there brought him up. Here Krishna, and his elder
brother Balaréma, who joincd him, wandered about together as children, and
evinced their divine character by many unruly pranks of surprising strength, such
as kicking over the cart, which served as conveyance and domicile to Nanda and
his family. The female Daitya PGtan& was sent to suckle him ; but the refractory
baby, discovering the trick, showed his gratitude by slaying her. Later in life he
vanquished the serpent Kéliya in the middle of the Yamun4 (Jumna) river. A
demon, Arishta, assuming the form of a bull; another, Keshin, that of a horse;
anda third, Kélanemi, all undertook to destroy the boy ; but each fell victims to
his superhuman strength. Krishna now incited Nanda and the cowherds to
abandon the worship of Indra, and to adopt that of the cows, which supported
them, and the mountains, which afforded them pasturage. Indra, incensed at the
loss of his offerings, opened the gates of heaven upon the whole race, and would
have deluged them, had not our hero plucked up the mountain Govarddhana, and
held it as a substantial umbrella above the land. He soon took to repose from
his labburs, and amused himself with the Gopfs, or shepherdesses, of whom he
married seven or eight, among whom Radha was the favourite, and to whom he
taught the round dance called Résa-, or Mandala-nrityam. Meanwhile Kansa
had not forgotten the prophecies of Narada. He invited the two boys, Krishna
and Balarima, to stay with him at Mathura; they accepted, and went. At the
gates, Kansa's washerman insulted Krishna, who slew him, and dressed himsolf
in his yellow clothes. He afterwards slew Kansa himself, and placed his father
Ugrasena on the throne. A foreign king of the K&la-yavana (Indo-Scythian)
race soon invaded the Yadu, or Aryan territory, whereupon Krishna built and
fortified the town of Dwarake, in Guzerat, ard thither transferred the inhabitants
of Mathura. He afterwards married Satyabhimé, daughter of SatrAjit, and
carried off Rukminf, daughter of Bhishmaka. His harem numbered sixty
thousand wives, but his progeny was limited to eighteen thousand sons. When
afterwards on a visit to Indra’s heaven, he behaved, at the persuasion of his wife,
Satyabpam6, in a manner very unbecoming a guest, by stealing the famous
ParijSta tree, which had been produced at the churning of the ocean, and was
then thriving in Indra’s garden. A contest ensued, in which Krishna defeated
the gods, and carried off the sacred tree. At another time, a female Daitya,
‘Ush6, daughter of Bina, carried off Krishna's grandsén, Aniruddha. His grand-
father, accompanied by Réma, went to the rescue, and, though Bana was defended
by Shiva and Skanda, proved victorious. Paundraka, one of Vasudeva’s family,



===== PAGE 281 / 300 =====

140 BHAGAVAD-GITA.

afterwards assumed his title and insignia, supported by the King of Benares.
Krishpa hurled his flaming discus (chakra) at this city, and thus destroyed it. He
afterwards exterminated his own tribe, the Yadavas. He himself was killed by
chance shot from a hunter. He is described as having curly black hair, as
wearing a club or mace, sword, a flaming discus, a jewel, a conch, and a garland.
His charioteer is Satyaki; his city, Dwaraka; his heaven, Goloka. The epithets
by which he is addressed in our poem are chiefly as follows :—Hrightkesha (eee
note on I. 15), Keshava, Keshinishtdana, Janardana, Vasudeva, Varshneya,
‘Yadava, MadhusGdana, Govinda, Hari, and Kiritin (wearing a tiara). Keshava
is explained in Vishu-Purfpa, p. 497, by a legend, in which Brahm&, when sup-
plicated by the inhabitants of earth to protect them against the Daitfas, plucks
from his own head a white and a black hair, and says,‘ These hairs shall destroy
the Daityas, Kansa, and Kélanemi.’ The white became Balarama (rdma means
white), and the black, Krishna. For an explanation of the other epithets, see
under Vasudeva, Vrishni, Yadu, Madhu, Keshin, ete. Janirdana means ‘the
object of the supplications of men.’ For a more minute description of Krighna,
see Guigniaut, ‘ Réligions de l'Antiquité,’ Paris, 1826, vol. i. p. 194, etc.

KUNTY (or Pritht).—Eldest of the five daughters of Shara and Mérishé.
The friend of Shira, called Kuntibhoja, having no children, adopted Kunti, and
married her to Pandu, to whom she bore the three sons, Yudhighthira, Bhima, and
Arjuna. Pépdu, however, had, by the curse of a deer, been prevented from
having progeny, and she therefore conceived these children by connection with
the deities Dharma, Vayu, and Indra respectively. Yudhighthira, as son of
Dharma, is considered the justest; Bhima, Vayu's son, the strongest; Arjuna,
Indra’s son, the best bowshot. In like manner Nakula, the fourth Pandava, son of
Médri, by the Aghwin Nasatya, was the wisest ; and Sahadeva, by the other
Ashwin Dasra, the handsomest among men. From his mother Arjuna is called
Kaunteya and Partha. I. 16, 27; II. 14, 87, 60; III. 9, 39, ete.

KUNTIBHOJA.—A friend of Shira, who adopted his daughter Kunts (se
Kunti), and an ally of the Pandavas. I. 5; Vishnu-Puréna,p. 437, *

KURU.—{1.] An ancient king, son of Samvarana, by Tapati; and ancestor of
Vichitravirya, the grandfather of the Kurus and Pandavas. [2.] A very ancient
people, who would seem to have been originally situated in Central and Northern
‘Asia, since in the Purdnas they are mentioned as inhabiting the north of Jambu-
dwipa, or the known world (that is, the Continent of Asia), between the
Shyingavén (horned) range of mountains and the icy sea. They must have
entered India with the Aryans, if indeed they are not a tribe of thet great race,
and they settled in Kurukshetra. With this meaning the name applies to both
of the contending parties, whence Arjuna is called best of the Kurus, ete., in
IV. 31; X.19; and XI. 48. [3.] In its particular and exclusive sense, the name
ia given only to that party which adhered to Duryodhana, and opposed the
Pandavas. I. 26. All these names belong to the Epic period.

KURUKSHETRA.—The plain of the Kurus. A tract of land to the east of
the Yamun, or Jumna, river, in the uppor part of the Doab, near thé city of
Delhi, and the river Sarashwati (mod. Sursooty). I. 1, se8 note 3.

MADHAVA.—A name of Kyighna, which may either be derived as a
patronymic from Madfiu, who is mentioned among his ancestors, or be considered
equivalent to Madhusddana, ‘slayer of Madhu’ (see Madhu). I. 14, 37;
‘Vishnu-Puriga, p. 418.



===== PAGE 282 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES, 141

MADHU.—L[1.] A Daitya, giant or demon, though more probably one of the
aborigines, slain by Krighna, who is therefore called Madhustdane. I. 36;
IL. 1,4; VJ. 38; VEIL 2. [2.] An ancestor of Krishna, son of Kirtavirya,
descendant of Yadu, to whose family, the Yadavas, Krishna belonged, I. 14, 87.

MAKARA.—A huge amphibious monster, usually taken to be the shark or
crocodile, but depicted in the signs of the Zodiac with the head and forelegs of
an antelope, and the body and tail of a fish. It is the ensign of the god of love.
X. 31. Whatever symbolism and the Zodiac painters may have made of this
animal, this passage, at least, would seem to decide that it was jish of some sort.
Varuna, the god of the sea, rides upon it through the waves. Cupid bears it as
his emblém, on account of the fecundity of this species of animal, and the name
is used in the mouth of Hindds at the present day to designate a shark. The
depths of the ocean produce, and from time to time bring to light, such strange
and quaint creatures, that we cannot wonder at the Hebrew ideas about
Leviathan, or the Yankee feith in a sea-serpent. Still less can we blame the
Indian author in an age when railways and telegraphs were not at his service,
if he describe, or the astronomer if he paint, a marine monster, which he has
never seen, with somewhat amphibious and ambiguous components.

MANU.—This name belongs to the Epic and Purinic periods. In the former
we trace in it the remains of the tradition of a first man, alike progenitor, or
even creator, like Prometheus, of his descendants, and lawgiver. We should
conceive its historical value to be the allusion to some legendary personage, such
as every nation can boast of, who first wakes his countrymen from barbarism and
a wild life to the light of civilization and systematic government. In the
Purfpic period this first man is called Swayambhuva (from Swayambhuva,
“Brabm6), the son of Virhja, the son of Brahmf: and the code of laws «till
extant is sometimes attributed to him. Soon, however, the idea of a lawgiver
became more prominent than that of first man, and the number of Manus was
multiplied. Each Kelpa, or creation of the world, is divided into fourteen
Manwéntaris or intervals, over which-a Manu presides. Six of these have
already passed in the present Kalpa, and the seventh is now going on. The
present Manu, then, is considered as the actual author of the Dharma-shéstra,
the code which bears his name. He it is who is spoken of in IV. 1,—Vaivash-
wata-Manu, the son of Vivashwat, or the Sun, brother of Yama, and father of
Tkghwaku. The Manus, who are past, are named Swayambhuva, Swarochisha,
Auttami, Tamasa, Reivata, and Chékshusha; Vaivashwata is still in office.
The seven to come in the present Kalpa are Savarni, Dakghasivarni, Brahma-
sivarni, Dharmastvari, Rudrasivarni, Rauchya and Bhautya. X. 6. (Derivable
from man, ‘to think,’ meaning ‘ intelligent” man, that is, as contrasted with
other living beings. The word itself appears to have the meaning of ‘man’ in
the Vedas, while mdnava, and perhaps manughya, both meaning ‘man,’ are
derived from it.)

MARICHI.—The chief of the Maruts, or personified winds. X.21. (He
must not be confounded with the Marichi, who is said to be the son of Brahmé,
and father of Kashyapa, and is ranked among the Prajépatis, or progenitors of
mankind. Vighpu-Purina, pp. 49, 82.)

MARGASHTRSHA.—The month which comprises ¢he'latter half of Novem-
ber and the former half of December. X. 35, To the question why this month
should be placed at the head of the other eleven, the scholiast repliee—because


===== PAGE 283 / 300 =====

142 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

it yields crops of rice and other natural productions, and is neither too hot nor
too cold. Lassen, not content with this explanation (Bh.-G. p. 276), seeks to
place this month at the beginning of the year at the time of the composition of
our poem. It is otherwise called Agrahfyane, ‘the commencement of the year ;”
and although, at present, the Hindas begin their year in the month Vaighikha
(April-May), wo find in Prinsep’s Useful Tables, part ii. p. 18, that, in Bentley's
opinion, this month would have begun the year, before the use of a fixed calendar
in India, between n.c. 693 and 451. (The name is derived from Mrigashirgha,
constellation, containing three stars, one of which is A Orionis, and figured by
an antelope's head: from mriga, ‘ an antelope,’ and shirgha, ‘a head.’)

MARUT.—The different winds personified. They are considered ff seven, or
seven times seven in number. A ridiculous account of their birth from Kashyapa
and Diti, and a still more ridiculous derivation of their name from md rudah,
«weep not!” is given in Vighnu-Purépa, p. 162, X. 21; XI. 6,22. (The real
derivation is not known.)

MERU.—In the earlier Epic period this is probably the name given to the
high table-land of Tartary, to the north of the HimAlaya range, from the neigh-
bourhood of which the Aryan race may originally have pushed their way south-
wards into the peninsula, and thus have preserved the name in their traditions as
a relic of the old mountain-worship. In the Purinas, it appears as a fabulous
peak, forming the centre of the Jambudwipa, ‘the known world,’ which stands in
the middle of the six other dwipas, or continents of the world, and compared to
the seed-vessel of a lotus-flower, of which the dwipas are the surrounding petals,
Its height is said to be 84,000 yojanas (the yajana is nine miles), 16,000 of which
are below the surface of the earth; its diameter at the top is 30,000 yojanas, and
at the bottom 16,000. From its summit flows the Ganges, towards the four
quarters of the globe. On the south it is the Ganges of India; on the north, the
Bhadrasomé ; on the east, the Sité, on the west the Chakghus (Oxus?). Brahma,
the Rishis, and the Gandharbas reside on its summit, In short it is the Olympus
of India, X. 23 nu-Purdna, p. 166, and following. .

NAGA.—Originally the Cobra-Capella or Coluber-Naga. In mythology these
beings have human heads and the bodies of serpents; they are one thousand in
number, and bear jewels on their heads. They are the sons of Kashyapa and
Kadrd, subject to Vishyu's bird, Garuda, and inhabiting part of Pétéla, called
Naga-loke, the capital of which is Bhogavati. X. 29; Vighnu-Purina, p. 149.
(Derived from naga, * a mountain.’)

NAKULA.—Tho fourth son of Panda, though really begotten by the elder of
the two Ashwinan, Nésatya, by Madri or Bahlikt, the sister of Shalya. He is
half-brother to Sahadeva, the son of Dasra, by the same mother, and nominally
brother to the three other Pandavas. (The name signifies ignoble, from na,
“negative? and kula, ‘family;? but to whatever the name may allude, he is
generally considered as a type of the wisest among mortals.) I. 16.

NARADA.—A Devarghi or divine Righi, to whom is attributed the iuvention
of the Vina or Indian lyre, a code of laws, and one of the eighteen Purinas,
entitled Néradiya-Puria, In the Brahma-Purfina he is called the emooth-
speaking Narada, and dis likeness to Orpheus is carried still further by a descent
which he made from heaven to visit Patila, the nether regions. In Manu i. 36,
be is mentioned among the ten Prajépatis or progenitors of mankind; in Mahabh.



===== PAGE 284 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 148

i, 68, 2668, among the Gandharbas; in Vighpu-Purins, p. 60, n. 2, he is said to
be sprung from Brahmé’s hip. X. 13, 26.

PANCHAJANYA.—The name of Krighna’s conch. It was made of the bones
of the giant Panchajana, who dwelt at the bottom of the ocean, When Krighpa
was getting up his military acquirements, the son of his fchirya, or tutor,
Sand{pani, was drowned in the sea of Prabhésa, and carried down to the bottom
by the said giant. Krishna plunged in, dived down, slew the giant, brought up
his bones to make a conch of, and restored his son to the grieving tutor. I. 16;
‘Vighnu-Puréna, p. 562.

PANDY.—Second son of the Vyisa, Krighna-Dwaipfyana and Ambaliké, the
widow of Vichitravirya, the brother of Dhritarashtra, and nominal father of the
five Pandava princes, Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sabadeva. Hee
married Kunti or Prithé, and Madri or Bahlika; but having incurred a curse
from a deer which he shot, he was prevented from having progeny himself, and
the Péndava princes were therefore begotten respectively by the gods Dharma,
Vayu, Indra, and the twin Ashwinau. I. 3. (Pingu means ‘pale’ or ‘ white,’
perhaps alluding to the colour of the Pandava tribe. But ?)

PANDAVA.—Patronymic from P&ndu, applied first to his five sons, and then
generally to their party or army. I. 1,2; X.37. Also to Arjuna in particular,
I. 14, 20; IV. 35; XI. 36, 66; XIV. 5.

PAUNDRA.—The name of Bhighma’s conch. I. 15. (Probably derived from
Pundra, the ancient name for Bengal, with a part of South Bahtr and the jungle
Mahals.)

PITRI.—This word means ‘ father,’ but is used to designate a class of beings
neither divine nor human, which may be distributed under three heads, 1. The
original idea is simply that of ancestors, each man’s forefathers being his pitris,
to whom he made libations of water, and offerings of pindas (balls of rice and
flour), at certain periods fixed by holy writ. 2. Ten mythological personages,
considered to be the progenitors of the whole human race, and otherwise denomi-
nated Prajapatis, inhabiting o region called Pitriloka. 3. In the Purénas the
ancestors of all castes and tribes are divided into seven classes, three of which are
incorporeal and four corporeal. The three incorporeal classes are called Vairljas,
Agnishwattas, and Varhishads. ‘The four corporeal classes are the Pitris of each
of the four principal castes. Those of the Brahmans are called Somapss, or
‘Ushmapis, descendants of Bhrigu; thoso of the Kshatriyas are Havighmantas,
descendants of Angiras; those of the Vaishyas, Ajyapas, descendants of Kardama;
those of the Shdras, Sukélins, descendants of Vashishta. The origin of the
Pitris is said to be that they were the sons of the gods, who, disobeying Brahmé,
‘were by him commanded to learn obedience from their sons, whom they therefore
called their fathers /pitri. They are the fathers of the gods, and the oldest of
them. Residing in a world of their own, they receive among them the souls of
those pious dead who have particularly attended to their rites. Hence in IX. 25,
Krishna says, ‘those who are devoted to the Pitris go to the Pityis,” alluding to
the first*kind. In X. 29, when he speaks of Aryaman as their chief, he alludes
to the second kind. Vighpu-Purdna, p. 320.

PRAHLADA.—King of the Daityas, and son of Hirapyakeshipu, While a
boy, he is said to have studied philosophy and religion-very diligently, while bis
father, who had wrested their kingdom from the gods in one of the fights between
‘Indra and the Devas on the one hand, and the demons and giants, called Daityas

Ww


===== PAGE 285 / 300 =====

144 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

and Dénavas, on the other, was revelling in Indraloka in all the luxuries that
place could afford. When called upon by his father to give an account of his
studies, he answered boldly that he had discovered the one great,truth, that
‘Vishnu, the Supreme Being, was God alone. At this, Hiranyakashipu, who hated
the gods, was mightily incensed, and commanded the attendant Daityas, the
elephants and the Négas, to attack the boy; but such was the power of his faith
and devotion, that all their efforts were futile, aud he remained unscathed by all
their tortures. At length, Vighpu deposed Hirapyakashipu, and established
Prahlfida as monarch of the Daityas. He is also regent of one of the divisions
of Potala. X. 30; Vishpu-Purhna, p. 124, ef aegg. (The name also means
«pleasure, joy.’) :
PRITHA.—See Kuntf.

PURUSIT.— A warrior allied to the Pandavas, brother of Kuntibhoja. I. 5.
(From purw, ‘ many ;’ and ji, ‘to conquer.” But #)

RAKSHASES (or Rékshasas).—In their earliest conception they seem to be
those unknown creatures of darkness to which the superstition of all ages and
races has attributed the evils that attend this life, and a malignant desire to injure
mankind, In the Epic period they seem to be personifications of the Aborigines
of India, presented under the terrible aspect of vampires, flying through the air,
sucking blood, ete., in order to heighten the triumphs of the Aryan heroes, who
subdued them. In this character they play a very prominent part in the
RémAyana, the beautiful epic of Vélmfki. Here they are led by Ravana, the
King of Lanké, which is supposed to be the island of Ceylon and its capital, and
they aro subdued by Dasharatha Réma, the hero of the poem. In tho Purénic
period they are infernal giants, the children of the Righi Pulastya, and enemies of
the gods. They are then divided into three classes :—

1. The slaves of Kuvera, the god of wealth, and guardians of his treasures.

2. Malevolent imps, whose chief delight is to disturb the pious in their
devotions. .

3. Giants of enormous proportions, inhabiting Naraka, or hell, and hostile to
the gods. In the second Manwantara, they are sons of Kashyapa and Khas, It
is rather in their Purfnic character that they appear in our poem. X. 23; XI. 96;
XVIL. 4; Vishnu-Purdna, p. 150; also Mahubhtrata, i. 66, 2671. (The name
is commonly derived from rakeh, ‘to preserve,’ because they guard Kuvera’s
treasures. But ?)

RAMA.—This name, belonging exclusively to the Epic period, is given to
three personages of considerable historical importance, whose mighty deeds won
for them the privilege of being considered incarnations of Vighnu. ‘The first is
Parashurama, or Rima .of the Axe (parashu). He is considered as the sixth
‘Avatira of Vishnu, and belongs to the period of the first struggle between the
Brahmans and the Kshatriyas, tho hierarchy and the government. He cannot,
therefore, be rightly considered chronologically anterior to the others. ‘Ho is said
to be the son of a certain Muni, called Jamadagni; but as his mother, Kenuké,
was a lady of the Kghatriya caste, and as the children follow the caste of their
mother, he is not, like his father, a Brahman by birth, although he espoused the
Bréhman cause, and afterwards himself became a Muni. ‘The legend relates, that
the princess, his mothtr, having committed a sin, his father commanded his sons
to put her to death, All refused, except Rama, the youngest, who seized his axe
tnd felled her to the ground, In reward for this triumph of duty over feeling, he


===== PAGE 286 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 145

received the gift of invincibility. Afterwards, when Kertavirya, King of the
‘Hailteyas, violated the laws of hospitality by absconding with the calf of oblation
belonging to the Muni Jamadagni, to whom he was paying a visit, Parashurhma
seized this pretext; and with his battle-axe, having no other weapons, extermi-
nated the whole race of Kshatriyas. He was born at the beginning of the Treth
Yuga (second age). Vighpu-Puréya, p. 401 et eegg. The second is Dasharatha
Rama, or Ramachandra, the son of Dasharatha, King of Ayodhy& (Oude), born
at the close of the Treth Yuga (second age). Ho belongs historically to the age
‘when the Aryan race, already settled in the north, pushed their conquests towards
the southern part of the peninsula, and introduced into those wild districts civiliza-
tion and  fercultre, which are typified by Shita. She was the daughter of
Tanaka, King of Mithila (see Janaka), and R&ma received her as a reward for
his strength in breaking the bow of Maheshwara in that king's palace. She was
carried off by Ravana (see Rikshasas), and the war which ensued for her
recovery is the subject of Vélmiki’s beautiful epic, the Ramayana. He is the
seventh Avatéra of Vishnu. To him dos our poet allude in X. 31. The third
is Balarama, or Shrirama, the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, but mystically trans-
ferred from the womb of the latter to that of Vasudeva’s other wife, Rohini, and
thus saved from the hands of Kansa (sce Krishna). He is the playfellow of
Krishna, and shares his toils and his glory. He is at the same time, as Krishna,
the eighth Avatira of Vishnu, though sometimes considered as an incarnation of
Shesha, and born at the end of the Dwapara Yuga (third age).

RIGVEDA.—Rich (nom. Rik) is the name of the first and best-known Veda,
though from X. 22, it docs not seem to be held in the greatest reverence. It
chiefly consists of metrical hymns or prayers, called sicktas, or mantras, addressed
to the gods of tho elements, and each stanza of which is called a rich, whence the
name of the whole Veda. IX. 17.

RISHI.—In the Epic period this is merely a name for historical personages,
distinguished for their piety and wisdom, either by their acts or their writings.
Three kinds are there distinguished, Devarshis, or divine Righis, such as have
acquired complete perfection on earth, and ‘have consequently been canonized after
death,—Brahmarshis, sages of the Bréhman caste; and Rajarshis, those of the
Kshatriya caste, In the Purdnic period, the Righis par excellence (sometimes, a8
in X. 26, called Maharghis, or great Rishis), are soven primeval personages, born
of Brabmé’s mind, and presiding, under different forms, over each Manwantara,
The name has, however, a more extended sense, and seven classes are distinguished,
some of whom are mythological, some not: as follows :—1. Devarghis, or divine
Righis, euch as Narada, domigods inhabiting Indra's heaven. X. 13, 26; Vighnu-
Purina, p. 284. 2, Brahmarghis, seven in number, of whom Vashightha is chief,
the first institutors and guardians of divine matters. 3. Rajarghis, or royal
Righis, kings such as Vishwimitra, who have turned saints. IV. 2; IX. 33.
4. Paramarghis, supreme Righis, are sometimes merely Maharghis, or even common
Riyhis, called so out of courtesy. 6. Maharshis, great Righis, seven in number,
of whom in X. 26, Bhrigu is called the chief; but the name is also given by
courtesy to common Rishis. X. 2nd 25; KI. 21. 6. Shrutarghis, Righis who
possess a thorough knowledge of the Shruta, or traditional writings; and
7. Kndarghis, who had only a knowledge of part of the Vedas (kdnda). These
last two, says Schlegel, only exist in the dictionaries, Y. 25; X. 13; XI. 15;
XIIL 4; Vishnu-Purina, p. 284, n, 8. (The word is derived from righ, an old
Vedic root moaning ‘ to see.’)



===== PAGE 287 / 300 =====

146 BHAGAVAD-GITA.

RUDRA.—A species of demigod, eleven in number, originally belonging to the
‘Vedic period, and connected with the worship of Vayu, or the wind, as one of the
Vedic triad. When Shiva rose in the mythological triad, in the place of this
deity, as God of destruction, the name Rudra adhered to him, and the Rudres
were considered as inferior manifestations of him. Hence Shankara, who is Shiva
himself, is in X. 23, said to be their chief. In the Vrihadéranyaka Upanishads,
that is, much later than the Vedic period, they are said to be the ten vital breaths
(préga) with the heart /manas) as eleventh. In MahGbh. i. 66, 2666, they are
called the sons of Sthénu, which is a name of Shiva. In the Purinas they are
also called the children of Kashyapa and Surabhi. X. 23; XI. 6,22; Vishqu-
Purina, p. 121. (Commonly derived from rud, ‘ to weep,’ which, alludi-g to them
8 personifications of the wind, connected with storm, may be explained by the
sobbing, moaning noise of the wind.)

SADHYA.—A class of inferior demigods, twelve in number, dwelling between
heaven and earth, belonging to the Purinic period, in which they appear os the
sons of Dharma, or religious duty, and Sadhy4, daughter of Daksha. They would
seem originally to have been personifications of sacred rites or prayers, and with
these their names agree. XI. 22; Vishnu-Purina, p. 120. ‘The name is found in
the Epie age, as in Manu iii, 195; MahGbh. i. 66, 2595. (The name signifies, as
an adjective, ‘to be perfected or accomplished,’ such as sacred rites, ete. ; and as @
substantive masc., it would be a personification of such things.)

SAHADEVA.—The fifth and youngest son of Pindu, by his wife Madrf, or
Bahlika, but mystically begotten by Dasra, the younger of the two Ashwinau.
He is considered as the deau idéal of masculine beauty. I. 16.

SHAIVYA—An ally of the Pandavas, and King of the Shivis, the Sibae of
the Greeks. I. 5. (Gentile name from Shivi.) Vishpu-Purina, p. 444.

SAMAVEDA.—Siman is the name of the third Veda, which in X. 22, is called
the best of the three (see Veda). It appears to be little more than a recast of the
Rich, (see Rigveda), consisting of the same hymns, broken up and arranged so as
to be chanted during the various expiatory ceremonies. ‘Thus, while the Rich is
said to be in regular metre, to be recited aloud, and the Yajush consists chiefly of
prose, to be inaudibly muttered, the Saman contains a certain rhythm, or mode,
which was sung to music, and the name is also generally employed to designate a

hymn. X. 36; Colebrooke, Misc. Essays, vol. i. pp. 21 and 79.

SANJAYA (otherwise called Gavalgani, being the son of Gavalgana).—
was Suta to king Dhritarightra, and is on this account chosen as the reciter of
this poem. Originally sprung from a Bréhmani mother and Kehatriya father
(se Manu, x. 11), the Stitas, who often composed a whole tribe, partook of the
Iearned character of the Brahman and the warlike tendency of the Kshatriya. At
the same time they were neither priest nor soldier, but united the secondary offices
of both these classes. The Sata was, on the one hand, the genealogist, the
archeologist, and the bard, attached to each family, or even to each great warrior ;
and, on the other, his charioteer and groom, accompanying him into tHfe battle,
but not himself fighting. Thus, while his Bréhman origin prohibited his fighting,
his Kshatriya blood prevented his officiating in any way as priest. It is strange
to find the two offices he filled united in one person; but this union probably
originated in the days when tribe was constantly at war with tribe, when the
chariot held a most important place, and the charioteer, like the #vloxos in Homer,



===== PAGE 288 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER, NAMES. 147

from, his proximity to his warrior master, reached a great intimacy with him.
There is some indication of this in the story of Nala. See Burnouf, Bhigavata
Purina, volsi, Preface, pp. 26 to 81; Bhagavad-Gité, I, 1, 2, 24, 47; II. 1, 95
XI. 9, 86, 60; XVIII. 74.

SANKHYA.—The first and principal of the six philosophical schools of India,
and supposed to be founded by Kapila, Its character is thoroughly explained in
the Introduction, Ch. III. It is commonly divided into three classes: —1. The
pure Sénkhya, which, if it admits, does not mention, a deity or Supreme Being,
‘but considers the material essence as the plastic principle of all things, and is
therefore,galled nirishwara, or atheistical. Its text-books are the ‘ Sinkhya-
pravachana,’ and the ‘ Tattwa Samisa,’ both attributed to Kapila himself, and the
* Sénkhya-kérika,’ to his disciple Ishwara Krishna, Asuri and Panchashikha are
also mentioned as the earliest followers of this system. 2. The Yoga system,
called seshwara, or theistical, founded by Patanjali, whose Yoga-siitras aro its
text-book, and followed by the author of the Bhagavad-Gité. 3. The Purkyic
school, a corrupt mixture of the other two. (Lit., ‘rational,’ from sankiyd,
“reasoning, computation.’) II. 39; V. 4, 5; XVIIL 13.

SATYAKI (otherwise called Yuyudhina, g.c.).—A warrior in the Pfindava
army, son of Satyaka, and charioteer to Krishna, He is called a Shaineya prince,
from Shini, the ancestor of Satyaka. I. 17. (Patronymic from Satyaka.)

SAUMADATTI.—A warrior allied to the Kuru faction, son of Somadatta, King
of the Bahikas, but also called (in Vishnu-Purfina, p. 459) a son of Bahlika. The
Bahikas comprehend the different nations of the Panjab from the Sutlej to the
Indus. Tho Bablikas or Vahlikas, on the other hand, are considered to be the
Bactrians, or people of Balkh, whose country is said in the Mahabhérata to be
famous for its horses—a reputation still preserved to the neighbouring province of
Bokhara, I. 8; Vighgu-Purina, pp. 459, 189, n. 66; Mah&bhérata, vi. 61,
2108-10. (Patronymic from Somadatta.)

SHANKARA.—A name of Shiva, particularly as chief of the Rudras. X. 23.
(The word is composed of sham, a Vedic word meaning ‘ happiness,’ and kara,
causing,’ and has the same meaning as Shiva, viz. ‘ fortunate.’)

SHIKHANDIN.—An ally and general of the Pandava party, who was
originally a girl, but was transformed into a boy by a certain Yaksha. I. 17.
(The name means, ‘ wearing the Shikhanda,’ which consists of three or five locks
of hair in a circular patch on each side of the head, left at the tonsure of children’s
heads, especially of the Kshatriya caste.)

SHRI (or Lakshmt).—Tho wife of Vishnu, and goddess of beauty and fortune.
She belongs chiefly to the Purinic period, is said to be daughter of the Muni
Bhrigu by Khyéti, goddess of fame, and is in everything the counterpart of
Vishnu. X. 94; XVIII. 78; Vishpu-Purina, p. 60.

SIDDHA.—A species of demigod, apparently belonging to the Purspic age.
They would seem originally to have beon only mortals canonized after death ; but
this character is lost sight of in the Puranas. They are there said to number
88,000, being sons of Atri, one of the Prajapatis, dwelling in that part of the sky
situate between Nagavith{ (Aries and Taurus, or the Midky Way) and Saptarghi
(Ursa Major), ‘They are chaste and free from mortal passions, etc.; thoroughly
acquainted with the Vedas; and existing until the dissolution of the world at the?



===== PAGE 289 / 300 =====

148 BHAGAVAD-GITA.

end of Brahms Kalpa. In X. 26, Kapila is assigned a place among themy but
he is the only man, as far as we know, to whom this privilege was accorded.
X. 26; XI. 21, 22, 36; Vighpu-Purina, p. 227, (The namo, ag a adjective,
signifies ‘ perfect.’

SKANDA (otherwise Kuméra or Kértikeya).—The god of war, ranking among
the inferior deities, and belonging chiefly to the Purinic period. He is called son
of Shambhu or Shiva, or again of Agni. Shiva being the personification of the
destructive power of the Supreme Being, and Agni, ‘fire,’ being also destruc-
tive, the affiliation of war upon them is no matter of wonder or even enquiry. He
is the son of Shiva and Umé, that is, of fire and water, the essences ofstrength,
and is called Kartikeya from being brought up by the Kritikes or Pleiades. Like
the Roman Mars, he is also the god of the year. X.24; Ramby. i. 38, 39.

SUBHADRA.—Sister of Krishna, wife of Arjuna, and father of Abhimanyu
or Saubhadra, whose son wus Parikshit, the last Kuru sovereign, who was reign-
ing, says the Vighnu-Purana, at the time when the Vyfsa compiled the Purtnas
—a date which, if it allude to some more ancient lost works supposed to have
existed under that name, is very possible; but quite the contrary, if reference be
made to the works still extant under that title. I. 6,18. (From ev, ‘well,’ and
bhadra, ‘ propitious.’)

SURA.—This is a name for the Sun, and in the Vedic period for a class of
beings connected with the Day-god, or personifications of him under different
aspects. In the Epic period it is a general name for all the inferior deities, such
as Indra. In the Puranic, it designates a class of inferior deities, who inhabited
Swarga and composed the armies which Indra led against the Asuras. IX. 20.

UCHCHHATHSHRAVAS.—Indra’s charger, the chief of horses, who fed on
ambrosia, He was one of the fourtcen articles produced at the churning of the
ocean by the Gods and Daityas, and belongs exclusively to the Purinic period.
X. 27; Vishnu-Purina, p. 153, p. 78 note. (A compound of uchchhaia, ‘ap, on
high, and shravas, ‘an ear;’ meaning ‘ having his ears always pricked up,’ as a
sign of his high mettle.)

USHANAS (or Shukra).—The planet Venus, or its regent. As the latter, it
belongs to the Purinic period, and is considered as a son of Kavi, the preceptor
of the Asuras, said to have composed a code of law, mentioned with that of
‘Vrihaspati, and is himself teacher of the Daityas. His car is drawn by ten earth-
born horses, each of a different colour. X. 37; Vishnu-Purfna, p. 239. As a
mythological person he is son of the Righi Bhrigu. (Derived from ua, a root of
the first class, meaning ‘to shine’ (Lat. urere), found in Rig-veda, i. 113, v. 7,
from which ushaa, the dawn, is derived.)

USHMAPA.—A name for the manes, the shades of the dead. See Pitri.
XI. 22. (The name is derived from uphman, ‘heat,’ and pd, ‘to drink,’ here used
in the general sense of ‘devour.’ The allusion is probably to the belief (v. Manu,
iii. 237), that the shades of dead relations attended at the meals of the living, as
long as the dishes served remained hot, and were eaten in silence, The scholiast
thinks it refers to the fact that the manes snuffed up the warm steam that pro-
ceeded from the hot ("~

UTTAMAUJAS.—A warrior allied to the Pandavas. I. 6. (From wttame,
“+ utmost,’ and ojaa, ‘ strength;’ ‘of extreme strength.")



===== PAGE 290 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 149

VAINATEYA.—A namo of Garuda, the sacred bird and vehicle of Vishnu;
king of the whole feathered race, and inveterate enemy of the serpents, who aro
subject to kim. He is otherwise called Suparna, ‘the well-winged,’ and the
Purépas explain his name by making him the son of the Muni Kashyapa and one
of the numerous daughters of Daksha, called Vinat4, from whom Vainateya is
therefore deemed a matronymic. X. 30.

VAISHWANARA.—An ancient name of Agni, the god of fire, by which he is
invoked in the hymns 69 and 98 of the Rig-veda. XV. 14.

VARUNA.—The god of the ocean and waters, belonging to all three periods.
The regex of the west, and lord of punishment. His vehicle is the Makara, on
which he rides through the waters. X. 29; XI. 39.

VASAVA.—A name of Indra. X. 22, -

VASU.—A class of eight semi-divine beings, personifications of natural pheno-
mena, belonging to the Vedic period, and intimately connected with the worship
of the Sun. They are attendants on their chieftain, Agni, or Pavaka, personified
fire. Their names are differently given in different places, but the best reading
seems to be Ahar (day), Dhruva (the polar star), Soma (the moon), Dhava (fire),
Anila (wind), Anala (fire), Pratydsha (daybreak), and Prabhisa (twilight), all of
which, with the exception of wind, are connected with the idea of light. X. 23;
XL. 6, 22; Vishpu-Purdna, pp. 119, 120, 163.

VASUKI.—Chief of a species of serpents called Sarpa, belonging to the
Purinic period, and said to be one thousand in number, and sons of Kashyapa
and Kadra. ». Noga, X. 28; Vishnu-Purdna, pp. 149, 153,

VASUDEVA.—A name properly belonging to Krishna, but usurped sometimes
by Vishnu. It is a patronymic from Kyishna’s father, Vasudeva, who was one of
the ten sons of ShGra, a prince of the Yidavas, an important Aryan tribe, and
Marighf, according to the Purina, and who with his wife Devaki burnt himself
on Kjishna’s funeral pile, VII. 19; X. 37; XI. 60; XVIII. 74; Vishnu-
Purfna, p. 502. (A patronymic.) See Krishna.

VAYU.—One of the elementary deities belonging to the Vedic, and even to
the Ante-Vedic poriod, the personification of the air and wind, and the second
person both in the pure elementary triad (sun, air, and rain), and also in the
Vedic triad (fire, air, and sun). He is regent of the north-west quarter and chief
of the Gandharbas, who were the beings which peopled the atmosphere. In the
Epic and Purinic periods he plays a very unimportant part as one of the inferior
deities. XI. 39. (Derived from ed, ‘to blow.’)

VEDA.—Literally means knowledge or science: but in the primitive ages was
a name given only to theological knowledge, the science acquired and imparted
by the priests. Later it was extended to other sciences, such as medicine, and we
have a number of these called Upavedas, secondary sciences. In its earliest use,
then, it was more especially applied to certain works of the most ancient date,
which at one period, and for long time, constituted the only authorities for
religious and civil law, which the Aryan race possessed. Their undeniable an-
tiquity, attested by the very Ianguage in which they are composed, won for them
the reputation of having been originally delivered fo muan by Brahmé himself,
and the hymns are said to have beon inscribed on dry leaves, which were collected
and compiled by the Vyisa, Krighpa Dwaipéyana, and thus given to the worl] inp


===== PAGE 291 / 300 =====

150 BHAGAVAD-GiTA,

their well-known form. Originally, and, as it seems, even up to the date of our
poem, three Vedas only existed, the Rich, the Yajuph, and the Sdman. The
Atharvan was @ much later addition, probably composed after the figst struggle
between the Brihmans and Kghatriyas, with the latter of whom it is chiefly
occupied. The Rich consists of metrical hymns or prayers, termed Saktas or
Mantras, each stanza of which is called a rich, and addressed to the elements
personified. These hymns were recited aloud at the divers ceremonies, and the
Rig-veda is thus considered to constitute the laudatory part of worship. The
Yajugh is in measured and poetical prose, and contains prayers and invocations
‘used at the consecration of the sacrificial victims and utensils. The Sdman con-
tains hymns to be chanted at various expiatory ceremonies. Each Veds consists
of two parts, the Mantra or Sanhité, and the Brahmana. The former is the
collection /sanhitd) of eiktas or hymns, probably of the date of twelve or thirteen
centuries B.c., though the separate hymns are possibly still older. The latter
contains the rules for the application and use of the Mantras at, and for the per-
formance of, the particular religious ceremonies, with remarks on their origin,
and dating seven or eight centuries n.c. For a more ample account, we must
refer the reader to Colebrooke’s Misc. Essays, vol. i. and Weber's Geschichte der
Indischen Literatur, Berlin, 1853. (From vid, ‘know.’) II. 42, 45,46; VII. 8;
VIII. 11; X. 22, 42; XI. 48, 63; XV.1,15; XVII. 23,

VIKARNA.—The third of the one hundred sons of King Dhritarishtra, and
consequently of the Kuru party. I.8. (The name means ‘ earless.")

VIRATA.—A King of the Matsyas (Dinajpur and Rangpur), and an ally and
general of the Pandavas. It is also the name of an inland people inhabiting the
modern Berar. I. 4,17; Mah4bh. iv. 1, 16, ete. (A Prakpit form of virdghfra,
« kingdomless.’)

VISHNU.—1. One and the chief of the Adityas. X. 21. (See Aditya.) 2. The
second person of the mythological triad, and the personification in the Purdnic
period of the preservative or protective nature of the Supreme Being. This
character of guardian is particularly exemplified in the ten Avathras, or descents,
which this deity is supposed to make to earth in different ages of the world, but
generally with the object of preserving either the universe or mankind from the
power of the evil spirits, or of aiding his own religion and his own people, the
Aryan race, to gain a firm footing upon earth, or to extricate them from surround-
ing difficulties. These Avatiras are gencrally considered as direct emanations
only from Vishnu ; but in that of Krishna, the God himself is actually incarnate.
They belong purely to the Puranic age, and if I may be allowed to hazard a
somewhat premature opinion, I should conceive that the idea of an incarnation
generally, and many of the single Avatiras themselves, owed their origin to the
land of the Bible, but whether before or after the Christian era is a question
which I am not in @ position to answer, though there are, undoubtedly, many
points $f resemblance between Krishna and our Saviour. At the same time, it is
quite possible for such a story as that of the first Avatéra to have been handed
down by remote tradition from the time of Noah himself, without any communica
tion with Judea, and the discoveries of like traditions among distant races, who
could have had no such connection, would seom to confirm the possibility. Nor
must it be forgotten, that in whatever light the Avatéras two, three, four, and
five be regarded, whethe as remnants of traditions of actual events, thus dis-
torted ; or as pure inventions of the Purinic mythologists, the Avatras six, seven,
ight, ond nine, most indubitably refer to historical events, the principal actors in



===== PAGE 292 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 151

whigh, whatever.may have been their names or their families, were firetly the
hyoes spoken of by father to son, on account of their deeds; and then, when the
idea of Avatéras was once started, were considered as incarnations of the deity.
Lastly, the tenth Avatéra, yet to come, savours very strongly of the prophecies of
the Apocalypse. ‘The ten Avathras are as follows :— :

1, Mataya, the Fish.—In the Satya Yuga, or first age. While Brahmé was
reposing after many ages, the demon Hayagriva stole away the Vedas
(typical of the diminution of religion before the flood). Satyavrata (Noah)
was making his sblutions in the river Kritaméla, when a little fish
spproached him, and being taken up by him, grew to so great a size that
he placed it in the sea. Tt then addressed Satyavrata thus: —‘In seven
days the world will be deluged; I will, however, send thee a large vessel
(the ark), which thou must enter, taking all the medicinal plants and
kinds of grain, the seven Rishis, and pairs of all animals.’ Satyavrata
obeyed these injunctions, and attached the ark, by means of a serpent, to
a huge glittering fish with an enormous horn, the Avatéra of Vishnu.
‘The god then slew the demon, and Satyavrata became Manu Vaivaswata,
the first man and lawgiver. (See Manu.)

2, Kirma, the Tortoise.—In the Satya Yuga. The gods, being aware of
their mortality, desired to discover some elixir which would make them
immortal. To this end, Mount Meru (or, as others say, Mandara) was
cost into the great ocean. Vishnu then plunged in, in the form of a
tortoise, and supported on his back the mountain, round which the
serpent-king Vasuki was coiled, so that the gods, seizing his head, and
the demons, his tail, twirled the mountain round till they had churned
the ocean, out of which was then produced the amrita, or ambrosia, and
thirteen other articles. If this story have any historical allusion, it is
probably to the introduction of the arte of civilization among the Aryan

» people. -

3. Vardha, the Boar.—In the Satya Yuga. The demon Hiranyikgha had

carried off the earth to the bottom of the great ocoan, and Vishnu

assuming this form, dived down and rescued it, after a contest of one
thousand years,

Narasinha, the Man-Lion.—In the Satya Yuga. The demon Hiranya-

kashipu troubled the earth and provoked Vishnu by his impious pride.

‘The god, therefore, eame out of a column in this form and destroyed him.

If this have aity historical allusion, it is probably to the introduction of

the finer arta among the Aryan race.

5. Vdmana, the Dwarf.—In the Treta Yuga, or second age. The demon
Bali had gained possession of the triple world—heaven, earth, anf hell,
and the gods knew not how to recover it. Vighnu appeared before him
in the person of a very diminutive dwarf, and asked as a boon as much

” Yand as he could pace in three steps. Bali, laughing at the ridiculous
request, granted it at once, and Vighnu expanding, grew large enough to
step over the three worlds, but kindly left Patdle, or hell, the third,
to Bali. +3

6. Parashurdma, Rama of the Axe.—In the Treta Yuga. This refers to the
period of the first struggle between the Church and State. (Se Ramm)

°


===== PAGE 293 / 300 =====

152 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

1. Rémachandra, or Dasharatha Rima—In the Treth Yuga. The confest
between the Aryans and the Aborigines in the south of the peninsulas
and the introduction of agriculture and civilization. (See Rénea.)

8. Balardme, or Shri Rama, and Kriphna, in the Dwapara Yuga, or third
age.—The contest between the Aryans in the north-west and the Abori-
gines of the interior, and the settling of the Aryan race in India. (See
Rama and Krishna.)

9, Budiha, the celebrated Reformer, at the end of the Dwhpars, and the
beginning of the Kali, or present Yuga. Vishnu is supposed by the
enemies of Buddhism to have become incarnate in his person, ingorder to
confound the Daityas (that is, the Aborigines, now the lower classes),
who, by their devotional asceticism, were becoming too powerful. It is
the period of the struggle against the tyranny of the priesthood.

10. Kalkin.—Seated on a white horse, the deity will descend towards the
close of the Kali Yuga, the present and last age, and will destroy the
universe.

Tt has been remarked of the first four incarnations that they present a rogular
progression of creation. The first is aqueous, the second amphibious, the third
terraneous, the fourth the perfect, king of all animals. The first three animals
are remarkable for their fecundity. During the periods of the temporary annihila-
tion of the universe at the end of each Kalpa, Vishgu slecps on the waters, lying
upon the serpent-king Shesha, Brahmé is said to have sprung from a lotus which
grew from his navel. His wife is Lakshmi; his vehicle Garuda (see Vainsteya).
(The name is commonly derived from vish, ‘to enter, to pervade,’ alluding to
Vishnu, when identified with the Supreme Being, pervading all things ; but this
is evidently a Purdnic explanation. Lassen proposes as the derivation the root vi,
second class, ‘ to watch, guard, preserve,’ with the affix anu, alluding to the deity,
as personification of the proservative character of the Supreme Being. This
character of Vishnu is almost as late an one as the other. His original aature
must be discovered before we can give a true derivation.) XI. 24, 30.

VISHWA.—A class of semi-divine beings, belonging to the Vedic period of
mythology. The name signifies ‘all,’ and as the sacrifice offered to them is called
vaishwadeoa, or that of ‘all the Gods,’ it is.evident that the name was originally
meant to include all the deities of minor importance. ‘This idea is confirmed in
some degree by their position in the Vedas, where they are invoked in the same
hymns as the Vedic triad and the deities of a like importance, such as Mitra,
Saraswati, and the Ashwinau. Among these inferior deities, at an early period
of mythology, before the deification of many abstract ideas, the manes of ancestors,
and canonized heroes, would undoubtedly play an important part, and the mode
of sacrifice to the Vishwas consequently became that of the dead, viz. Shraddhas,
and the daily offerings of householders. Thus they seem to correspond pretty
nearly to the All-Saints and All-Souls, with which a long Romish liturgy will
often wind up; in short, convenient term which included all the etcetera. In
the Purfpic period they became a regularly organized class of demigods, con-
sidered to number ten or twelve, the sons of Yama, the god of justice, or Dharma,
religious duty; and Vishw4, the daughter of Daksha; and their names are given
as Kratu and Daksha Yndmes of Pitris or Prajapatis); Purdravas, Kuru, and

 Madrava (names of founders of tribes or families); and the following five names
of abstract ideas, Kama (love), Satya (truth), Dbyiti (constancy), Vasu (wealth),


===== PAGE 294 / 300 =====

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES. 153

Kip (time). From this it would soem that these ten were only representatives
a from a much greater number, as two Pitris for all the Pitris; three
ancestors of tribes for all such ; and five of the principal abstract ideas. XI. 22;
‘Vighou-Purana, pp. 119, 326; Manu, iii, 121.

VIVASWAT.—A name of the Sun, and father of Vaivaswata Manu. IV. 1, 4.

VRIHASPATI.—The planet Jupiter. In the Purknic age he is the regent of
that planet, son of the Pitri Angiras, and tutor and chaplain of the Deities. His
car is drawn by eight pale horses. ‘There is a story about his wife Tara (star),
Deing carried off by Soma (the moon). X.24. (Commonly derived from orihat,
“ great,'and pati, ‘lord, master.’ Lassen considers the first part to be a genitir
of some obsolete word orth, which he suspects to mean ‘air;’ just as odchas in
Véchaspati, and divas in Divaspati, are genitives of div and vdeh.) =~

VRIHATSAMAN.—The great Saman hymn, some part (it is not known
which) of ‘ the Simaveda.’ X. 36. (Vrihat, great, and sdman, a hymn of the
Sémaveda.)

VRISHNI.—1. Son of Madhu, belonging to the family of Yadu, and ancestor
of Krishna, who is therefore called Varshneya, ‘the descendant of Vrighni.’
I. 41; III. 36, 2 The tribe of which this king was the founder, probably the
same as the Médhavas and Yadavas, X. 37; Vishnu-Puréna, p. 418,

VYASA.—This is not a proper namo, but a title, meaning ‘ the compiler,’ and
it is given to a personage in the Epic period, who is said to have compiled the
Vedas. There is no reason for doubting the actual existence of such a person, and
the name given him is Krishna Dwaipfyana (derived, says the Vishnu-Purtna,
from dwipa, ‘an island,’ because he was born on an island in the Ganges). It is
the plan of the Purinic period to multiply or systematize all that tradition has
handed down from the preceding periods, and accordingly we find mention made
of twenty-eight VySsas, who are incarnations of Narayana or Brabmé, and
descend to earth at divers periods to arrange and promulgate the Vedas. Of these,
Krishfna Dwaiptyana was the last and most celebrated. To him accordingly do
modest writers, unwilling to hand down their own names to posterity, attribute
the composition of their works, and in consequence, compositions of such different
dates as the MahtbhGrata, with its episode, tho Bhagavad-Gith ; the Vedinta,
the greater number of the Purinas, and a grammer, are all ascribed to him.
It is, however, quite possible, that in many works, where simply the Vyésa is
mentioned without the addition of the name Krishya Dwaipfyana, the allusion
may be to the actual author of the work, the word being taken in its most general
sense of ‘ compiler, arranger.’ In the Puripas he is said to have been the son of
Partshara, the Muni, in whose mouth the Visnnu-Purdna is related, by Satyavatt,
before her marriage to Shantanu, the father of Bhishma and Vichitravirya, and
when the latter died without issue, the Vyasa married his widows Amb& and
Ambaliké, who then gave birth to Dhritardghtra and Péndu. See Bhishma,
X. 13, 87; XVIII. 75; Vighnu-Purina, p. 276, ete. (From vyas, = vi + as,
“to agrange, compile’)

YADU.—Eldest son of Yayti, fifth King of the lunar dynasty, and founder
of that tribe into which Kyighna was born, on which account the god is called
Yadava, the son of Yadu. The kingdom called Yady is on the west of the
‘Yamuné (Jumna) river, about Mathuri and Vrindivan ; but the Vighnu-Purtna
(p. 416) ridiculously pretends that Yayati gave his son the Dakshina, or :
as his portion. XI. 41; Vighpu-Purdna, pp. 416, 418,



===== PAGE 295 / 300 =====

154 BHAGAVAD-GiTA.

YAJURVEDA.—The second of the three Vedas existing at the period of yur
poem. It chiefly consists of measured and poetical prose, and of prayers
invocations applicable to the consecration of sacrificial victims and uterffils. It is
divided into two parts, the White and the Black Yajugh. The former is called
‘Véjasaneyi, and is ascribed to Y4jnavalkya, to whom it was communicated by
the sun in the form of a horse. The latter is called Taittiriya, and is ascribed to
‘Vaishampayana. IX. 17; Colebrooke’s Misc. Essays, vol. i. p. 66, eto, (Said
to be derived from yaj, ‘to sacrifice,’ this part of the Vedas treating more par-
ticularly of offerings.)

YAKSHA.—A species of demon, belonging to the Epic apd Purinicgperiods,
and in the latter said to be the sons of Pulastya and Pulaha, and guardians of the
treasures of Kuvera, the god of wealth, In the creation of the present Man-
wantara, they are the sons of Kashyapa and Khasé. X.23; XI. 22; XVII. 4;
Vishpu-Purina, p. 160; Mahabh. i. 66, 2672. (Said to be from yaksh, ‘to
venerate’) Comp. Rakshasa,

YAMA.—In the Epic period this deity is the personification of lawful punish-
ment, and as such identified with death. In the Purfinic period, he is the son of
Surya, or Vivaswat, the Sun, and consequently brother of Vaivaswata Manu. His
mother is said to be Sanjni, or Conscience. He is represented as king of justice,

rovided with a cord or noose as executioner, and presides over the twenty-eight
(or more) Narakas, places of future punishment for the divers kinds of offences,
Yamapura, the city of Yama, is his residence, and thither the soul departs after
death, and receiving its sentence from Yama, either mounts to Swarga, the
material heaven, descends to one of the Narakas, or is born again on earth in the
body either of men, beasts, or vegetables, etc., according to its offences. X. 29;
XI. 39; Vishnu-Puréna, pp. 163, 207, 266. (From yam, ‘to restrain,’ as
restraining mortals from evil by the fear of punishment. See Nala, iv. 10.)

YUDHAMANYU.—A warrior, allied to the Pandavas. I. 6, (Lit. ‘one who
is enthusiastic in the fight.’ From yudhd, instr. case of yudh, ‘a battle’? and
manyu, ‘ anger.")

YUDHISHTHIRA.—Tho eldest of the five sons of Pindu, mystically begotten
in his mother Kunti by Yama or Dharma, the god of justice, and therefore
remarkable for his equity, and called Dharmarhja, king of justice. He was King
of Indraprastha, ancient Delhi. I. 16. See Pandu. (From yudhi, loc. case of
yudh, ‘battle,’ and sthira, ‘firm ;’ ‘unflinching in the fight.’)

YUYUDHANA.—A warrior, allied to the Pandava faction, son of Satyake,
and therefore called Satyaki /. v.). Also called Shaineya from his ancestor
Shini, who was grandfather of Vyighni. He thus belongs to the Yadu tribe.
I. 4; Vighpu-Purana, p. 435. (The word is the pres. part. Gtmane-padam of
yudh, ‘to fight,’ formed as if it belonged to the third, instead of the fourth, class
of verbs.)


===== PAGE 296 / 300 =====

INDEX OF REFERENCE TO THE NOTES.

(The small figures refer to the number of the note, the large to the page in which the

* 2

A
A (the leter, 72+

‘Aodon le a nature), 14 % 2211 3g 10-18
39? 116% 116! 119 %

Adhibhata, 56 +

‘Adhidaiva, 56 *

‘Adhiyajna, 67 +

Adbyétman, 56

Adnyézas Chapter), 8

‘Ages (Yuga), 30 $69

Agrabiayapa (the month), 78
tre, 513 89 0

dis 6

‘debe, 62° 65.1
Akshara, 2318 47 3
‘Ambrosia Amrita), 25 86 1
‘Angmaya, 1
‘Apaiyhuna, Tos »
‘Arjuna, 425
‘Asady 65 2
‘Ascetic, 49 %
‘Ashwattha (onredfg-tee),T1™ 100
‘Asterisms (lunar), 7
‘Astikya, 121 ©
Asura, 53 3%
‘suri Sampad, 106 ?
‘Atha (the conjunction), 86 &*
‘Atheism, 107 6
Atirichyate, 14
Kuetbtes of th supreme me Bei

tributes of the Su ing,
ag gat

tyarthem, 53
‘Avasha, 60 23
‘Avatéras of Vishnu, 80 ¢
‘Avyakta, 613 84"? 98 1

°

B.
Bhdarhyana, 88 *
Badh, 118
Bandhu, 44 1
Banners, 4 *
Banyan-tree, 100 *

note occurs.]

Being (Supreme), 11 661 625 63°
B42 b-28 G6 8-27 B41 902
9] 22-26 oo se 33 12497125 @
wad-Gith, 8147 87 1
a shya (kind of food), 103 *
Bits 4, 18 %
Bhavan, 21
Bhighma, 2 2
Bhojya (kind of food), 104 *
Bhuta, 71 7 111
Body,’39 2
Bonds of action, 14 *%
Brahma (neuter), 231 66
Brahm (the deity) 23 "80
Brahmi's Day (Kalpa), 69
Brahmachérin, 45
Brahmaloke, 42. 48 0
Brahmasttras, 88 9
Buddhi (intellect), 15 % 61% 89 ¥

95 *

©.
Caste, 74 137 257 314
Change of metre, 77 8
Chapters (Adhyayas), 8
Character (natural), 49S 5g 0
Chhandas, 88 ¥
Choshya (kind of food), 104 % 111
City with nine gates (the body), 89 *
Conch-shells, 3
Cosmetogy ofthe Sinkhya-syetem, 681%
Cow of plenty, 2
Creation, 63°8

D.
Daivf Sampad, 106 ?
Day (Brahmé’s), 59
Dead (the worship of the), 7 ™
Deities, 121 «
Destruction of caste, 7 *
Devotee, 49 48-51
Dharmakshetra, 1 3
Digestion, 103 25
Discus (Rrishe’ 8), 77 17
sitions (natural), 49 © 62 116
Division of the Bhagavad-Gits, 875! @


===== PAGE 297 / 300 =====

of
Being, 76 &10 77 1
v.
Universal vitality, 108 106
Universe, 124
ta, 96 1
vidim, 97 #

v.
Vaishw:! 103 5
‘Vaishya (the caste), 67
Varshts {the season), 73 5
‘Vasanta (the season), 73 #
Vi 53

Vaya, 63 7

Vedinta system, 88 * 104 #8
Vedas, 16

Vedic hymns, 101

Vedya, 64
‘Vibhsh (rapernataral powers), 69 *

1 the Bggreme

Watch (Yama), 119 4

Women's pla in Inia, 06

Worlds, 6% 43% 46%; (the next
364 488

Worship, 84} (af the dead), 7

Y.

Zejns (cecrites), 64
Yakghaloke, 42°29
Yama (a watch), 112 U
‘Yamuné (the rivet Jumna), 1 ®
Yathédartha, 27 9

e (relat. pronoun), 78
Yeas (Huma), 73 eat
Yoga, 141164 20% 218 96
Yogakshema, 16 @
Yogeshwara, 26 3
Yuga, 30°" 69 9

eterses aterit, incerta, wuervexn.


===== PAGE 298 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 299 / 300 =====



===== PAGE 300 / 300 =====
