===== PAGE 1 / 266 =====



===== PAGE 2 / 266 =====



===== PAGE 3 / 266 =====

PUBLISHERS’ NOTE 
This is a series of discourses that Swamiji gave to the 
Ashram’s Y.V.F. Academy from April to June 1990, on the 
Bhagavadgita. The Bhagavadgita was one of Swamiji’s 
favorite scriptural texts, and Swamiji was never tired of 
expounding its truths. All of Swamiji’s discourses were 
delivered extempore, and no matter how many times he 
spoke on a subject, the approach was always fresh and 
unique. 
3 


===== PAGE 4 / 266 =====

CONTENTS 
Publisher’s Note .................................................................................. 4 
Chapter 1: Introduction to the Bhagavadgita .................................. 5 
Chapter 2: The Background of the Bhagavadgita ......................... 23 
Chapter 3: The Transmigration of the Soul................................... 38 
Chapter 4: The Total Picture of Creation ...................................... 48 
Chapter 5: The Karma Yoga Principle of the Bhagavadgita ........ 68 
Chapter 6: Sankhya—The Wisdom of Cosmic Existence ............ 87 
Chapter 7: The Entry of the Absolute into the Relative ............. 106 
Chapter 8: The Stages of Yoga ....................................................... 128 
Chapter 9: The Yoga of Meditation .............................................. 148 
Chapter 10: The Hidden Meaning of the Seventh Chapter 
 of the Gita .................................................................. 168 
Chapter 11: Beholding God as He Beholds Himself .................. 185 
Chapter 12: Communing with the Absolute through the 
 Cosmic Tree ............................................................... 196 
Chapter 13: The Positivity and the Negativity 
 of Experience ............................................................ 216 
Chapter 14: Our Involvement in the Whole Creation ............... 239 
Chapter 15: Krishna and Arjuna Together is Victory ................ 254 
4 


===== PAGE 5 / 266 =====

 
Chapter 1 
INTRODUCTION TO THE BHAGAVADGITA 
There are two forces in this world, upon a balancing of 
which everything functions. They may be designated as the 
positive and the negative powers of nature, or the subjective 
and the objective sides of experience. There are two sides 
for everything in this world: one which receives, and 
another which is received; that which is conscious of an act 
taking place, and the object towards which the action is 
supposed to take place. Philosophically, these phases of 
experience, or activity of force, are known as the subjective 
phase and the objective phase. 
There is a world in front of you, and you are also there 
in this world. Right from morning till evening, until you go 
to bed at night, you are engaged in the handling of this 
world—the world consisting of anything which you have to 
encounter, which you have to face in some way or the 
other, which stares at you as a question, a problem or a task 
to be executed. The early morning gazes at you as a 
problem and a series of questionnaires. These are the things 
to be done in respect of the atmosphere, the environment 
in which you are living. 
The circumstances, the conditions of life taken in their 
totality, all things that you regard as whatever is to be done 
or handled, may be regarded as your world. “I live in a 
world.” This is what you may say to your own self. But what 
kind of world is it in which you are living? You have in 
front of you the world of nature: the solar system, the sun, 
5 
 


===== PAGE 6 / 266 =====

the moon and the stars, the galaxies, space and time, the 
mountains and the rivers, the forests, the hills and the dales, 
and the ground on which you are seated. This is the world 
indeed. 
But you will appreciate that your life in this world, 
which expects you to do something and often forces a hard 
question, is not necessarily in the mountains and the rivers, 
nor the sun and the moon and the stars. You are not 
thinking of them very much. “Today I have to deal with the 
sun or the moon or the mountain in front of me in some 
manner. Today I have to handle this Earth. I have a lot of 
work to do with the forests and the hills and the dales.” 
These questions do not arise in your mind. The world of 
nature does not seem to be posing a problem as you would 
define a problem in your personal experience. When you 
make statements such as, “I have a lot of difficulty. It is 
difficult to live in this world,” obviously you are not 
referring to the world of nature—mountains and rivers, or 
the trees in the forest. You are not even referring to the 
animals in the jungle, though they are important enough 
and you have to be cautious of them. All the subhuman 
species which you may categorise under the animal, plant, 
vegetable, and mineral kingdoms do not seem to be 
attracting your concern so much as something else which 
you have in your mind when you say that this is a difficult 
world. 
If you psychoanalytically subject yourself to a study of 
what experience it is that you are passing through in your 
daily life, you will realise that your adjustments, which you 
call your work in this world, are concerned with human 
6 
 


===== PAGE 7 / 266 =====

beings more predominantly than with anything else. You 
wake up in the morning and prepare yourself for work. 
Mostly, it may be work in a particular condition where 
other people are also involved, such as farming, working in 
a factory or being in an office—all which involve necessary 
adaptation to human circumstances. All work in this world 
is related to the existence of people and things other than 
your own self. This word ‘objectivity’, as distinguished from 
the subjectivity of your own personality, actually concerns 
itself with this world which is humanly oriented and 
externally conditioned. The world of experience is 
something outside you. Here is the whole problem. 
The Bhagavadgita starts with a great human question—
a problem that did not appear to be there at all, and 
suddenly it projected itself into a concrete confrontation 
under another circumstance altogether. People in an 
undivided family, for instance, with several brothers 
involved, may be living a happy life of mutual harmony and 
adjustable sacrifice. Brothers, as the word itself signifies, 
constitute a fraternity of affectionate members cooperating 
mutually in every conceivable way. Brothers are always 
friends. They cannot be anything other than that. They are 
cooperative forces. You cannot expect a conflict among 
brothers; else, they would not be brothers. But apart from 
the fact that persons are fraternally related in a family, there 
is another element involved which is often missed in the 
heyday of our ignorance of the basic relation that obtains 
between one person and another.  
It is not true that conflicts cannot arise between 
brothers, though the word ‘brother’ is a beautiful word 
7 
 


===== PAGE 8 / 266 =====

which implies that such a conflict is unthinkable. Because a 
person is your brother, a conflict should not arise between 
you; but because of outside factors, conflicts can arise. A 
brother is not merely an affectionate participant in a family 
setup. He is also an independent individual.  
Here is the whole point. How can two persons be 
independent and yet be cooperative to the hilt? How can 
you expect total sacrifice on the part of a person who is also 
independent like you? If you consider that the other person 
is not independent, then you also may not regard yourself 
as wholly independent. If an abolition of independence 
assumed by persons can be considered as necessary for a 
cooperative life of sacrifice, conflict may not arise. Even 
nations may avoid war if it is not absolutely called for. But a 
peculiar trait called egoism in human nature which is in 
families, in communities, in nations—a self-assertive 
principle which will not submit to the call of any other 
person or any other nation—may set up a new type of 
environment around you.  
Father and son are perhaps the best example of 
immense cooperation and affection in a family. Yet, have 
you heard of them going to court for partition of land and 
not speaking to each other? Father and son are mutually 
sacrificing elements—biologically, psychologically and even 
spiritually cooperative to the basic substratum. Nothing can 
be a greater affectionate bond than that between a parent 
and a child. But even between these two, there can be a 
conflict because the child, when it grows up, assumes a kind 
of natural independence. This is perhaps the reason why in 
a slightly sarcastic or humorous way, the great lawgiver 
8 
 


===== PAGE 9 / 266 =====

Manu tells us: prapte tu shorase barse putra mitra-
badacharel. It is an instruction to the father and the mother 
that when their son reaches sixteen years old, he must be 
considered as a friend and not as a son. That is, you should 
no longer subject him to your orders.  
The world of nature and the world of human society, 
when it is subjected to an acute philosophical analysis, will 
present itself in this circumstance of a dual action taking 
place between the world of nature and yourself, and 
yourself and the people around you, who are also like you. 
The Bhagavadgita occurs in the context of a big 
Armageddon, the Mahabharata war. The interesting 
phenomenon of the delivery of the Bhagavadgita is that the 
most sacred thing that it is—a holy teaching connected with 
God and creation, something which you would like to hear 
in a sanctified spot such as a temple or an ashram, a 
university or an academy, a school or a college—is given in 
the worst of human conditions, called battle. Nothing can 
be more odious and unsuited for the delivery of a divine 
gospel than the field of war where minds are tuned up to an 
immediate and immanent attack. Such a circumstance was 
considered as the best occasion for the delivery of the 
divine gospel.  
The great work of Krishna Dvaipayana Vyasa, who 
wrote the Mahabharata, is not merely a story that you can 
witness as a television drama, as you have it these days. It is 
not a novel which you can read at your leisure for your own 
personal pleasure. It is a study of human nature. It is a 
history, no doubt, but not merely a political history like the 
history of England, Europe or India, as you read in your 
9 
 


===== PAGE 10 / 266 =====

colleges. This is a history of human character, the 
development of the human psyche, and the ups and downs 
of human development throughout the process of the 
march of time—not merely confined to a particular point in 
time. So you may say this great epic of the Mahabharata is a 
history of the time process, not the history of India, not the 
history of the Bharatas. It is the history of humanity as 
conceivable in the very structure of the time process itself. 
The term ‘humanity’ should be understood in the 
context of the creation of the world itself, and not in the 
light of the anthropological or the modern historical 
findings which commence human history sometime after 
3000-4000 B.C. The history of the world did not start only 
at that time; it began when creation itself started. When 
Brahma created Manu, or God created Adam and Eve, you 
may say, history commenced. Therefore, for you, from the 
point of view of what you may have to learn from the 
Bhagavadgita, history may be regarded as a cosmic process. 
At one place in the Bhagavadgita, the great Master refers to 
Himself as the Time Spirit. Kālo’smi loka-kṣaya (Gita 
11.32): “I am here before you as the world-transforming 
Time Spirit.” 
Transmutation is the process of creation and 
destruction, and everyone is involved in this time process, 
which is basically mutation. Time never stands still for even 
a second. It undergoes transformation. It is a conflict 
between the present and the future. It absorbs the past into 
the present and runs forward into the future. There is a 
continuous activity taking place with every person and 
every thing involved in time. There is a confrontation of the 
10 
 


===== PAGE 11 / 266 =====

three phases of the time process—past, present and 
future—something going, something coming, or we may 
say more prosaically, something dying and something being 
born. It is something like a war taking place. The history of 
humanity, which is the history of creation itself, is a story of 
events dying and being born that constitute the whole of 
history. 
God speaks to man in the Bhagavadgita. It is not an 
individual Krishna that speaks to Arjuna. The symbology, 
the cosmicality, the inner suggestiveness that is immanent 
in the entire epic of the Mahabharata is something that you 
have to read between the lines. Poets do not merely write 
lines; great poets also write something between the lines. 
That is the grandeur of the poet. You may read Valmiki, 
Vyasa, Milton, and Shakespeare. They do not merely tell 
you their words, but they also tell you something which 
they have not spoken through the words; that is the spirit of 
the poetry. It is that which is between the lines, in between 
the words, that stirs you, stimulates you, enraptures you 
and causes you to read it again and again. The words, of 
course, are noted everywhere. Every word in the 
Mahabharata, every English word used by Shakespeare may 
be in the dictionary and you know what the meaning of the 
words are, so no words in Shakespeare can be regarded as 
unknown to you. But why is it that Shakespeare inspires 
you? It is not merely the words, but the adjustment of the 
words, the force that the words are expected to generate by 
their compilation in a particular manner. That is the poet’s 
power. Poetry inspires you much more than prose—
especially great poetry, epic poetry. Vyasa’s Mahabharata, 
11 
 


===== PAGE 12 / 266 =====

Valmiki’s Ramayana, or whatever it is, is some such great 
example which stimulates you from the heart. What is it 
that attracts you? It is something you yourself cannot 
know—a spirit that is operating behind the presentation. 
The poet’s imagination catches you. The battlefield of the 
Mahabharata, the war that was the occasion for the delivery 
of the Bhagavadgita, is therefore not merely a local event to 
which we are making reference.  
So when you study the Gita, it is not enough if you 
merely read the words and understand them grammatically. 
In almost every good translation or commentary of the 
Gita, you will find exact grammatical meanings of each 
Sanskrit word are given; the same thing is arranged in a 
prose order, and you have the translation. This is good 
enough. Very few commentaries will go beyond the mere 
translation and the meaning of the words. There is an old 
saying that Sri Krishna alone knows what he said, Arjuna 
knows something of it, the great Suka Rishi knows it, Vyasa 
knows it, and nobody else can be said to know it entirely. 
The spirit of the cosmos manifested itself at the time of the 
delivery of the gospel. It was not the Yadava hero that 
spoke; the Universal Spirit manifested itself at one stroke, 
as if the whole world stood up and spoke. Can you imagine 
how you would receive the gospel if the entire universe 
stands before you and speaks to you from every corner? 
Every leaf in the tree speaks, and every atom vibrates and 
has a tongue before you, which will give you a message. 
Everywhere is gospel, the whole world coming from all 
sides. The entire space is speaking to you. What will you 
feel at that time? You will shudder from the roots of your 
12 
 


===== PAGE 13 / 266 =====

being. This happened to Arjuna when the Cosmic Spirit 
manifested itself; his very roots shook. You can never 
imagine a condition in which the whole cosmos will speak 
to you. You have seen only one or two persons speaking to 
you, or ten people shouting at you. This is all that you 
know. But can you imagine the entire world speaking to 
you at one stroke—not merely this Earth, but the whole of 
creation speaking to you from every nook and corner? That 
circumstance was stirred up by the conditions described in 
the First Chapter of the Bhagavadgita. 
As I mentioned, the conflict which is the battlefield, 
under which circumstance the Bhagavadgita was thought to 
be properly delivered, is connected with your very soul 
itself. It is an adhyatma-vidya; it is a spiritual teaching. It is 
not a war gospel, it is not a military science, it is not a 
science of sociology, it is not human psychology, it is not 
even cosmology—though all of this the Bhagavadgita is, 
because of its integrated nature. As a parent speaks to a 
child from every aspect of the well-being of the child, God 
speaks to man from the point of view of the welfare and 
well-being of creation as a whole. It is a message to me, to 
you, to all those that were, all those that are, and all those 
that are yet to be. It is a gospel of eternity. Eternally valid is 
this message. You cannot say that it was good only at that 
time when the war took place. 
Actually, this war is taking place always. It did not 
simply take place once upon a time, five thousand years 
back. The context of the spiritual significance of the 
Mahabharata battle is an eternal occurrence, and therefore 
it is taking place even now. As an Arjuna, you are facing the 
13 
 


===== PAGE 14 / 266 =====

world context in the same manner as he seems to have 
faced it many, many years ago. The problems he faced, you 
are also facing today, but not every day. Today, just now, 
you are in a hall of teaching; you may not be thinking of a 
serious problem in your life. Arjuna did not have a problem 
always in his life. It rose up only when confronted by him. 
You can know the nature of a human being when you 
oppose that person. In a very friendly and chummy way 
you cannot know what a person is, but opposition coming 
from all sides will rouse up the spirit of even a rat. If you 
corner it in a room, it will jump on you although it is small. 
You have cornered it from all sides, and so it asserts its last 
might—that is, jumping on your face. A mouse can do that, 
and you will run away. You would not like a mouse to be 
on your nose.  
The world does not always fight with you. Nobody will 
fight with you always. Even the Kauravas did not fight with 
Arjuna every day. It looked as if everything was fine. But 
something unexpected was an inner and outer occurrence, 
which is the description you have in the First Chapter of the 
Gita, and that brought the cat out of the bag, as they say; it 
brought out the true nature of the human individual. There 
are certain conditions when your true nature comes out, 
not always. You have enough money in your hand, you 
have a nice family, you have a friendly society, you are very 
secure in every way. What is the problem? Everything is 
good. Honey and milk are flowing in this world. You may 
think like that, but honey and milk will not always flow. 
There will be thorns, and you will have to pass through 
thickets. 
14 
 


===== PAGE 15 / 266 =====

Arjuna thought that he lived in a friendly atmosphere of 
human relation. Bhisma was his grandsire, Drona was his 
teacher, and the Kurus themselves were very close in blood 
relation. They were more than friends; they were relatives. 
Your relative is more concerned with you than a friend. 
Arjuna, the hero who was the generalissimo in the battle of 
the Mahabharata, faced the world. 
Many of us do not face the world properly because we 
are cosily placed, and are not being wrenched from all our 
pet relations. Some good karmas that we performed in the 
previous life seem to be keeping us satisfactorily happy. But 
the earth can shake one day, even for the best of men. Even 
a king can become a pauper tomorrow. Nations can perish. 
The Roman Empire can go to dust. This is not unthinkable. 
King and beggar make no difference when they are on their 
deathbed. They want a little glass of water. The king will 
say, “Give me a little sip of water. My throat is parched, and 
I am passing.” He will not think of his kingdom, his queen 
and his ministers. This will also be what the beggar will 
think: “Give me a little water. My tongue is drying up. I 
cannot speak.” This is what you want finally, when the 
world tells you what it really is. When it confronts you, it 
will tell you what it is. Kālo’smi loka-kṣaya: It will stand 
before you as a destroying power. 
You may ask, “Is the world so unkind to us? Is God so 
merciless?” It is nothing of the kind. These ethical and 
social rules do not obtain in a world which is wider than 
human society and family relation. ‘Mercy’, ‘goodness’, 
‘kindness’, ‘affection’ are words which are meaningful to us 
human beings; but the cosmos God has created is not made 
15 
 


===== PAGE 16 / 266 =====

up of human beings. God has not created human beings, 
actually. He has created forces, energies. As modern science 
will tell you, quanta of powers by a process of permutation 
and combination become larger by logical embodiments 
and may look like organisms, plants, animals, and human 
beings; but really, in God’s eye, or to the eye of the world 
itself, there may not be plants, animals and human beings. 
There are only cosmic forces operating.  
Any kind of attachment or aversion, any emotion which 
is sunk in love and hatred, is not the way in which the 
world is working or, perhaps, God Himself is working. God 
does not love you or hate you. Nādatte kasyacit pāpaṁ na 
caiva sukṛtaṁ vibhuḥ (5.15): The Lord wants not your good 
deeds, nor does He care for your bad deeds. The actions 
that you perform are the dispensers of your own justice. 
The universe is more an embodied law than a field of force 
that looks like human beings.  
Perhaps many of you are scientists, or at least 
acquainted with the science of Newton, and so on. The 
classical science of Newton says that many things are in this 
world of space and time as things can be in a basket or glass 
balls can be in a soda bottle. In that way, the world of 
matter seems to be inside space and time. This is the 
classical picture that Newton and Laplace presented before 
us, making out thereby that there is no organic relationship 
between space and time and the world of matter, much less 
the relation between ourselves and space and time. That 
would keep us away from the structure of the cosmos, 
vitally speaking. If Newton’s statement was entirely true, 
space and time would not be vitally connected with us. We 
16 
 


===== PAGE 17 / 266 =====

would be like apples in a basket. A basket knows not that 
there are apples, and the apple does not know that it is 
inside a basket, though it is inside. Such is the case that is 
made out by classical science, classical mathematics. Two 
and two make four. They cannot make anything less or 
anything more. 
But modern findings, as you are all perhaps aware, have 
shown a vital relationship between even space and time and 
your own selves, so that you are sitting in this hall at your 
desk, not unconnected with the walls around you, not 
unconnected with the sun that is shining in the sky, not 
unconnected even with the distant stars or what you may 
call the white hole or the black hole. With that you are 
connected even just now. Though modern science is not 
regarded as a spiritual science, it tells you, very strangely, 
that every cell in your brain is connected to every atom of 
the cosmos. Every person is a cosmic individual, you may 
say. Certainly you are made in the image of God; and as 
God is a cosmic entity, anything that is made in the image 
of that cosmic substance should also have a cosmic 
significance. So you are not Mr. so-and-so, a little boy born 
of somebody who is your father. This is not the way in 
which the Bhagavadgita asks you to understand yourself, 
your relations, your friends, your society. 
Arjuna never knew that there is such a profundity 
involved in his relation with the atmosphere outside. He 
thought he was a Pandava, a son of so-and-so, brother of 
so-and-so, relative of so-and-so, student of so-and-so—
none of which is our description. The Bhagavadgita 
becomes an eternal gospel only because of the fact that it 
17 
 


===== PAGE 18 / 266 =====

stands above all sciences, all teachings, and every branch of 
learning in schools and colleges as a solution to your 
ultimate problem, which is the relation of yourself to 
creation itself. When you die one day, what happens to 
you? Your sciences, your geographies and histories do not 
know what happens to you, though it is an event that can 
take place at any moment. What is the good of your 
education, your degrees, if tomorrow something happens to 
you and they cannot help? The whole thing is gone. You 
have gone to the winds. You have become ashes. Is this the 
tragedy you are expecting in this world by working so hard, 
by the sweat of your brow, in offices and factories to take 
care of your family when you are going to die tomorrow? It 
is a predicament you cannot escape, which you have to face. 
But nature has a trick, a peculiar stratagem by which it 
prevents you from knowing that such a tragedy can take 
place; else you will not eat today, you will not sleep, you will 
not drink a cup of water if you know that tomorrow is the 
last day—which it can be, but it should not be known. The 
stratagem of nature keeps you in ignorance of the facts of 
life and presents before you a golden apple brought from 
the garden of Hesperides. This is very, very unfortunate.  
Sri Krishna’s gospel is God’s gospel to mankind, not 
merely to people in India, in an eternal setup. It is not a 
religious gospel of Hinduism, or a religious teaching at all; 
it is a scientific teaching connected with your relationship 
with the entire creation. Therefore, ordinary commentaries 
will not be of much utility to you though, of course, they 
introduce you to the basic framework of the teaching. 
18 
 


===== PAGE 19 / 266 =====

The Bhagavadgita is the Lord’s song, as they say. 
Bhagavan is Bhagavat. Song is a musical message that has 
sprung from God, as it were. When God speaks, He speaks 
in a language of Eternity. He does not speak in English or 
Sanskrit or Latin. It is the tongue of the Eternal that spoke 
here. That ferocious and fear-striking picture that is painted 
in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavadgita is a faint 
attempt that is made by the best ability of the poet to tell 
you what you can expect finally when the world does not 
want you any more. When you go to war, you do not 
always go with the idea of coming back safe. You may go to 
the other side also; but what is the use of going to the other 
side? What is the purpose? Even if death is the outcome of a 
war which is considered as very unavoidable, what happens 
to you after death?  
If nothing happens after death, perhaps nothing 
happens in this life also. There will be no significance in 
what you do in this world. If the life that you live in this 
world is full of meaning, there will also be meaning in what 
happens to you after the passing of this body. Life and 
death are connected in the life that is eternal. Life is 
disconnected from death in the life that we live in time; but 
our life is not merely confined to time. It is timeless. You 
have taken many births. How many births you have taken, 
nobody can say. Right from the original will of the 
Almighty Himself at the time of creation, and the 
evolutionary process, which is the process of mutation, you 
have been conditioned to all these subjections to the 
different species through which you have passed. Indian 
tradition says that eighty-four lakhs [8,400,000] of yonis or 
19 
 


===== PAGE 20 / 266 =====

species are there through which you have to pass before you 
become a human being, and even the birth of a human 
being is not the last terminus of human evolution. 
The restlessness that you feel in this world and the 
unhappiness that characterises your daily life will tell you 
that life in this world as a human being is not complete. If 
human life is complete, you would be happy always and no 
problem would be facing you. There would be no anxiety of 
any kind if human life is the last point, the terminus.  
The Upanishads say there are realms of being that 
transcend human life, and modern evolutionary doctrine 
says there are species above the mineral, the plant and the 
animal, leading to the human species. The Upanishads say 
that there are realms of being, denizens occupying a 
different order of life altogether, larger than what can be 
comprehended by a human being. The Gandharvas, the 
Devas, the realm of Brihaspati, Narayana and Nara, up to 
Prajapati, Brahma, Virat, Hiranyagarbha, Ishvara, and the 
Absolute, are used to take your mind beyond the concept of 
human satisfaction and human limitation. 
Life is not complete merely with bread and jam. Even 
with the best of comforts that you have in this world, you 
are still very poor in comparison with the great blessing 
that is ahead of you. That will be opened up in a series 
through the chapters of the Bhagavadgita, which are 
eighteen in number. There are also eighteen books of the 
Mahabharata. They seem to be designating a gradational 
ascent of teaching, the movement of the spirit of man in an 
advance in the direction of higher and higher dimensions 
20 
 


===== PAGE 21 / 266 =====

of experience until God-experience becomes the fulfillment 
of life. 
In the earliest of stages, which is the First Chapter, it is a 
tragic experience. It is a battlefield that is described there, 
with kettledrums of war, bands beating for the forthcoming 
neck-to-neck fight, and arms drawn for the eventuality. 
With that, the Bhagavadgita commences the First Chapter. 
And the greatest hero Arjuna, representing humanity itself 
we may say, cowed down. The best of men cannot face the 
forces of nature. The widest learning that you have will not 
give you even one piece of bread that is not earned and 
produced by somebody else.  
To this condition of a possible descent of human nature 
into an utter helplessness of understanding of what is 
ahead, Arjuna was introduced. It is something that any one 
of us can expect. Perhaps some of us have an inkling of 
what the bitter side of life is. I do not think every one of you 
is the happiest of human beings. There is something 
pricking your back that you are trying to ignore by adding a 
cushion, but still it is pricking. Life tells you that it is not 
always very soft. With every beautiful rose flower, you will 
also find a little thorn on its stem. So for every pleasure that 
comes to human nature, there is also a little poisonous sting 
which may manifest itself one day or the other.  
When you study a subject, you have to see the whole of 
it. Therefore, learning should not be merely a branch of 
learning such as physics, mathematics, history, or 
geography, because a historian does not know what 
geography is, and a geography student does not know what 
history is. Their knowledge is parochial, very limited. But 
21 
 


===== PAGE 22 / 266 =====

the wisdom of life, the insight into things, is a total grasp of 
things and knowing all things at the same time by an 
intuitional sight. That it is which the Bhagavadgita will 
provide for us. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 
 


===== PAGE 23 / 266 =====

Chapter 2 
THE BACKGROUND OF THE BHAGAVADGITA 
Dharmakṣetre 
kurukṣetre 
samavetā 
yuyutsavaḥ, 
māmakāḥ pāṇḍavāś caiva kim akurvata sañjaya (Gita 1.1). 
This is the first verse of the Bhagavadgita. It is a query 
raised by King Dhritarashtra to his counsellor, Sanjaya: 
“When the Pandavas and the Kauravas were arrayed in the 
field for a battle, what actually happened? How did they get 
on among themselves?”  
This world, this field of universal conflict, may also be 
considered as Dharmakshetra and Kurukshetra at the same 
time. The field of the Mahabharata war was the 
geographical location called Kurukshetra—a place of 
pilgrimage even now, which you can visit whenever you 
have time. It is also designated in this verse as 
Dharmakshetra because it is said that in this particular holy 
spot many yajnas or sacrifices were performed by rishis of 
yore; therefore, the place has the blessedness of being 
charged with the atmosphere of sanctity generated by 
sacrifices—yajnas performed even by gods themselves, as 
the tradition goes. 
This world in which we are living is also, 
simultaneously, a Dharmakshetra and a Kurukshetra. 
Commentators on the Bhagavadgita referring to this 
particular verse make out that Kurukshetra may also mean 
‘a field of activity, being busy’, and Dharmakshetra may 
mean ‘a field of righteousness’. This world—which is also a 
field of conflict in many a way, as I tried to point out in the 
previous discourse—is indeed busy with the process of the 
23 
 


===== PAGE 24 / 266 =====

evolution of the created beings on Earth. Everything is 
busy; all are active. From the minutest particle of the 
mineral world right up to the human level, you will find 
everything is busy doing something. Even the galaxies and 
the systems above in the skies are not static entities. 
Everything moving in a state of flux is this world. 
Momentary is the appearance of anything, at any time. As it 
is well said, you cannot touch the same water of the river in 
two consecutive seconds. The river flows. You are not now 
what you were a few minutes before; and in the future, a 
few minutes later, you shall not be what you are now. 
Everything is hurrying forward like the carriages of a 
railway train. So the world, this entire creation, is one of 
intense activity, movement, restlessness, transitoriness, 
fluxation, a hurrying onward. 
It is also, at the same time, a field of virtue and 
goodness, of righteousness of the law. This activity of the 
world is not a haphazard movement in any direction 
whatsoever. It is a well-organised movement. It is a 
systematised activity, which means to say, it is conditioned 
by a law that is directing it. Though endless is the variety of 
activity that is going on everywhere in this world, this 
endlessness is rooted basically in a single orderliness. It is 
not that anything is going anywhere, in any direction 
whatsoever. There is a methodology in the universal 
activity. This method is the law, so-called.  
On the one hand, therefore, you are intensely active; on 
the other hand, your activity is guided by a principle. The 
guiding principle is the dharma, the righteousness 
mentioned here, and the activity is that in which you are 
24 
 


===== PAGE 25 / 266 =====

engaged. That which subjects you under a compulsion of 
activity to do something or other every day is the 
Kurukshetra aspect of this world—the karma field, as it is 
called. But all the multitudinousness of your activity is 
finally determined by a principle, and everyone who is busy 
in this world knows that it is this principle that guides 
them.  
You are busy and active because there is something that 
you wish to achieve through that activity. The achievement 
is a future occurrence. A thing that has not taken place, and 
is yet to be, is the futurity of the expectation through the 
activity that is a present involvement. That a future, which 
is only an expectation that is hoped for, is connected with 
the present, which is the actual activity, would indicate that 
there is a law that connects the present with the future. 
Though every bit of time process is disconnected, as it 
were—the past has gone, the future has not yet come, and 
the present is like a hair’s breadth of indescribable 
duration—notwithstanding this fact, there is a connection 
between the past, the present and the future. The memory 
of the past, the involvement in the present, and the 
expectation of the future are a total occurrence in the 
psyche of the individual. If you cannot expect anything 
which is not yet to be—if the future has no connection with 
the present, and something which you are expecting many 
years ahead is not related to the present activity—that 
expectation would be a futile exercise. “I shall reap a harvest 
of satisfaction twenty years afterwards.” With that hope, 
you plant a little tendril or sow a seed in the garden. The 
connection of the present activity with the future 
25 
 


===== PAGE 26 / 266 =====

expectation is a part of the law. And there is actually a 
single law operating in the whole world. Its manifestations 
are several, but its root is single. 
Dharma, the principle of righteousness or justice, is 
what we may consider as the law of integration of things—
the cohesion of factors—bringing together discreet 
particulars and creating a meaning between items which 
are apparently not related to each other. Several things in 
this world do not appear to be connected to one another; 
but there is a connection between what happens on this 
planet Earth and the distant stars. It brings about an inner 
correlation between the apparently remote principle or 
entity with the location of your own self. 
In this field, which is therefore the world of action and 
the world of righteousness, two forces are arrayed for the 
achievement of an expected result. The principle of battle 
and war is the breaking down of the present circumstance 
and the creation of a new condition altogether. What is 
now has to be broken down, it has to be effaced completely, 
and what is not now should be generated by the very action 
of the effacement of the present. War is a destruction of 
what is at present, with the expectation of something that 
will be created in the future. With this expectation it is that 
the Pandavas and the Kauravas armed themselves in the 
field of Kurukshetra. 
The word used by Dhritarashtra is also significant: “My 
people.” This is the word that he used first: māmakāḥ; 
pāṇḍavāś caiva: and the sons of Pandu. “What did my 
people and the sons of Pandu do in the field of 
Kurukshetra, having arrayed themselves for battle?” There 
26 
 


===== PAGE 27 / 266 =====

is a marked difference between how we evaluate things 
related to ourselves and things which we consider as not 
related to ourselves: “My people are the group headed by 
Duryodhana. The sons of Pandu belong to Pandu only; they 
are not mine.” 
This world is constituted of two things: what is mine 
and what is not mine. The whole battle is just between these 
two forces: mine and not mine. Don’t you think that the 
world is made up of only these two things? Is there 
anything else in this world? “This is my house, these are my 
relations, this is my family, this is my property, this is my 
village, this is my hutment, this is my country. That is not 
mine.” Sometimes parents tell little children, “Your 
neighbour is your enemy; don’t go to that house.” So 
children are initiated at the very outset as to how to think in 
terms of ‘mine’ and ‘not mine’.  
You have to put on a dual attitude in your daily life in 
respect of what is yours and what is not yours. It does not 
mean that you are involved only in what is yours. You are 
also daily involved in things which are not yours. The world 
is not compartmentalised in such a marked way that you 
can completely be free from relation with what is not yours. 
Wherever you are, even in a motorbus or a railway train, 
you will find what is not yours and perhaps what is yours.  
Inasmuch as what is yours and what is not yours is to be 
found everywhere, you have to put on an attitude of 
adjustment daily, right from the beginning of the day. You 
place yourselves in a state of tension because of this dual 
principle that seems to be confronting you. You arm 
yourselves psychologically when you enter an office, go for 
27 
 


===== PAGE 28 / 266 =====

a meeting, enter a parliament house or work in a factory. 
Psychologically, you are at drawn swords for every kind of 
eventuality, a psychological war that may be created on 
account of the circumstance of there being in that field of 
work two principles operating: that which is yours and that 
which is not yours. 
When you go to work in a factory or an office, you will 
find certain peculiar conditions prevailing which you 
cannot regard as yours, or as palatable to you. You would 
like to shunt them off and push them out, show them a 
stepmotherly treatment, or wish that they would not be 
there at all. And there are other circumstances in the very 
same place which you would eagerly like to have, or wish 
they would continue for as long as possible. But whatever 
be your wish and your attempt to adjust yourself to these 
circumstances, you are in a state of tension. You will never 
find in this world only that which is not yours, nor will you 
find only things which are yours. They will all be mixed up. 
Even under your nose just at this moment you will find 
there are two factors operating: that which you would like 
to have and that which you would not like to have; 
something pleases you and something displeases you. So 
pleasure and pain, love and hatred, like and dislike 
condition our very existence. 
The king uttered these words, perhaps not knowing 
their implication. He was blind, physically as well as 
mentally. He could not see things because he was born 
blind, but he could not understand things properly because 
he was intellectually ignorant. This question was raised 
before 
Sanjaya, 
the 
counsellor, 
the 
minister 
of 
28 
 


===== PAGE 29 / 266 =====

Dhritarashtra, and this question is raised before every one 
of us in this world of action, which is the world of 
righteousness. 
The Bhagavadgita in its entirety, in all its eighteen 
chapters, may be said to be telling you nothing but this 
much: how you can blend action with the principle of 
righteousness in a state of harmony. Act you must. You 
cannot escape from the performance of the deed. Some 
kind of engagement is always there, and no one can be free 
from doing something. The Gita will tell you that even 
when you are apparently doing nothing, you are engaged in 
that particular action of doing nothing. Therefore, not 
doing anything is an impossibility. 
Now, the question of doing or not doing is not an easy 
state of affairs. It was not possible even for a wise, very 
cultured individual such as Arjuna to make a decision as to 
what is to be done and what is not to be done. He did not 
know exactly what was before him. Many a time we do 
things under the impression that those things are expected 
of us, but the consequences are not always before our eyes. 
We are blinded, to some extent, as regards the results that 
follow from our action. It is the expectation of the Gita that 
your deeds, your expectations, your performances, the 
works that you do, should be guided by a central principle. 
What that central principle is will be told to you gradually 
during the course of the discourse. There is a gradational 
ascent of the teaching which culminates later on at a point 
when you will be face to face with the most stimulating fact 
that nothing can be done unless it is cosmically involved.  
29 
 


===== PAGE 30 / 266 =====

This world of righteousness and action, Dharmakshetra 
and Kurukshetra, is the field where the Pandavas and the 
Kauravas girt up their loins for the Mahabharata war, as it 
is called. You perhaps know the background of the story of 
the Mahabharata. There were, in ancient times, certain 
ruling princes, cousin brothers, usually called the Pandavas 
and the Kauravas. Dhritarashtra and Pandu were brothers. 
Because Dhritarashtra was blind, he was not considered fit 
to rule the kingdom. Pandu was to rule. But as fate would 
have it, Pandu died prematurely and Dhritarashtra had to 
be installed as king though he was blind and otherwise 
unfit. The children of Pandu were called the Pandavas. 
Dhritarashtra therefore, being the king, found himself 
practically unable to handle the affairs of the state, and the 
powers virtually went to the hand of his eldest son, 
Duryodhana. The eldest of the Pandavas was Yudhishthira, 
and his brothers were Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and 
Sahadeva; they were five in number. The sons of 
Dhritarashtra were one hundred, and he had a daughter 
also, making one hundred and one. 
Right from the beginning of childhood there was a feud 
between the Kauravas and the Pandavas. The Kauravas 
constituted the children of Dhritarashtra; the Pandavas 
were these five brothers. Right from early childhood there 
was animosity on the part of the Kauravas, especially 
Duryodhana, in respect of the Pandavas. They tried their 
best to see that the Pandavas were annihilated. They 
poisoned them, tried to burn their house, drove them out, 
and many such things were done. Somehow or other, the 
Pandavas did not die; they survived. The Pandavas married 
30 
 


===== PAGE 31 / 266 =====

Draupadi, the daughter of King Draupada, and it was at this 
time that the Kauravas learned that the Pandavas had not 
died. Though Duryodhana had hatched a plan to burn 
them alive in their house made of a combustible material, 
this plan somehow did not succeed. When Dhritarashtra 
came to know that the Pandavas were still alive, and 
Bhishma, the moral leader of both the Pandavas and the 
Kauravas, also came to know of this fact, he ordered the 
invitation of the Pandavas and saw that they were installed 
in a proper place and had their own independent estate to 
rule—a place called Khandavprastha, which later on 
became known as Indraprastha.  
It was in Indraprastha that Yudhishthira, virtually 
having been installed as an independent king, wished to 
perform the Rajasuya sacrifice, which means to say that he 
expected the other rulers nearby to be vassals paying tribute 
to him, and he would be the emperor par excellence. Due to 
Yudhishthira’s 
reputation 
of 
goodness, 
virtue 
and 
greatness, all the kings participated in this sacrifice and 
offered tribute to him. Hundreds of thousands of people 
gathered for this grand sacrifice, gold and silver flowed 
from all directions, and the wealth of Yudhishthira could 
not be counted.  
This was enough for Duryodhana, who would not 
tolerate it any more. His heart started burning. “These 
fellows have come back, and now they are ruling the 
kingdom with so much pomp and glory.” Duryodhana 
hatched another plan, to play dice. In those days, kings used 
to play dice. It was a viciousness which crept into the royal 
palaces, and it was the ruin of even the Pandavas. This dice 
31 
 


===== PAGE 32 / 266 =====

play took place twice. Firstly it ended in a tragic instance 
of the humiliation of the Pandavas and their queen, after 
which, due to some good sense that arose in the 
mind of Dhritarashtra, he ordered that all that the 
Pandavas lost in the game should be handed back to 
them. “Let the past be past. Forgive and forget. Let the 
Pandavas go back. I honour them still. Go.”  
This was again a blow to Duryodhana. “This old man 
has spoiled the entire thing; otherwise, they would have 
gone as paupers, having lost everything.” He had a second 
plan to play dice once again. This time it was not possible 
for Dhritarashtra to intervene in this matter because there 
was a condition, as a sting attached to this play, that anyone 
who was defeated in this game of dice would be exiled; for 
thirteen years they would live in the forest, and then live 
incognito somewhere for one year—fourteen years out. The 
idea was that in fourteen years they would perish in the 
forest and not come back at all.  
So again the dice play was organised, and Dhritarashtra 
could not intervene. All kept quiet. For the second time, 
Yudhishthira was defeated. According to the stipulation, he 
had to be exiled; and they all went to the forest, losing 
everything. They were beggars. For thirteen years they 
suffered in the forest. But the Mahabharata epic tells us that 
the gods themselves came to their aid. Indra and Lord Siva 
bestowed blessings on the Pandavas, and Lord Sri Krishna 
went to console them and assure them of his support.  
When they completed their thirteen years, and even the 
fourteenth year of incognito was ended, Sri Krishna came 
from Dvarka with his retinue and held an assembly in 
32 


===== PAGE 33 / 266 =====

Viratnagar, saying that a messenger should be sent to the 
Kurus demanding the Pandavas’ share. A Brahmin was sent 
who was, of course, well versed in the art of speaking, but 
the Kurus humiliated him, shunted him out, and sent back 
no good message. On the other hand, they sent Sanjaya to 
vituperously and sarcastically speak to Yudhishthira: “You 
should not unnecessarily enter into conflict with the 
Kauravas. Conflict is not good. War is bad. You are going 
to gain nothing by this battle. Be satisfied with what you 
have.” The messenger was sent back with a counter-bolt by 
Sri Krishna, and another messenger was to be sent, more 
efficient than the Brahmin who was not competent enough 
to achieve anything.  
Sri Krishna himself said, “I shall go.” Though it was not 
the pleasure of Yudhishthira that a person like Sri Krishna 
should go as a messenger, there was no alternative. Sri 
Krishna went and spoke, but all that he spoke fell on deaf 
ears. Duryodhana, against all principle of justice and fair 
play, denied even an inch of land to the Pandavas, and even 
wanted to hold the ambassador, Sri Krishna, tie him up and 
imprison him so that he could not go back and do anything 
good for the Pandavas. This plan also did not succeed. As 
Sri Krishna represented the cosmic Absolute, he showed his 
Vishvarupa, which stunned the whole audience; and 
speaking not a single word afterwards, he returned to the 
Pandavas saying that his embassy did not succeed, so war 
was the only alternative. 
Now comes the context of the Bhagavadgita, which is 
on the very first day, when the forces on both sides were 
arrayed on the field of Kurukshetra. Arjuna, the leader of 
33 
 


===== PAGE 34 / 266 =====

the Pandavas, having been placed in the midst of the two 
forces to survey who were there, saw something in front of 
him. This is the seed sown for the Bhagavadgita. The 
dialogue between Sri Krishna and Arjuna was occasioned 
by this peculiar thing which Arjuna saw before him.  
What did he see? He saw exactly what we see when we 
open our eyes and see the world—a dual, conflict-ridden 
feeling of love and hatred. He was there to see the end of all 
the Kurus, for which he had raised his Gandiva bow and 
arrows. He was not there to take pity on the Kauravas. An 
army does not enter the field of action to show mercy to the 
other side. That is not the purpose of engagement in war at 
all. It is not a place for pity, compassion, tender feelings. 
They are all abolished completely in a battlefield, and 
bitterness reigns supreme. “These ill-willed, wretched 
Kauravas, let me have a look at them!” thought Arjuna, who 
asked Sri Krishna, his charioteer, to place him in the midst 
of the army so that he may have a perfect survey of his 
opponents. But Arjuna did not see merely the opponents. 
He saw with his eyes the opposing army, but saw with his 
mind another thing altogether. He began to feel that they 
were Kurus, and not opposing forces. Paśyaitān samavetān 
kurūn (Gita 1.25), said Sri Krishna himself. I do not know 
why the word ‘Kuru’ was used by Sri Krishna when he 
referred to the opposing forces before Arjuna. That word 
was enough to catch fire.  
“Kuru! They are my own people. I am also a member of 
the family of the Kurus. The great king Kuru was the grand 
ancestor of us all. The blood of the ancient master, the king 
Kuru, flows through our veins, the veins of the Pandavas 
34 
 


===== PAGE 35 / 266 =====

and the Kauravas. We are blood relations, biologically 
bound up into a single family. Whom am I seeing in front 
of me? It is my grandsire, my beloved master, my loved 
one, the great Bhishma. Who do I see in front of me? My 
venerable teacher Drona, who has taught me archery; and if 
I know anything today, it is because of him. Am I against 
him? Is he against me? Am I to direct an arrow against 
Bhishma and Drona? What a sin! This is not for me. I put 
my bow down. Even if I am unarmed and the Kaurava 
forces attack me and I die, it is good for me. And if the war 
does not take place and I become a beggar asking for alms 
from people and live like a poor man, even that is 
blessedness. I shall not ask for even heaven if that is to be 
gained by bloodshed.” Saying this, Arjuna threw down his 
bow and arrow. Here is the entire picture of the First 
Chapter. 
Both Duryodhana and Arjuna had gone to Krishna for 
help, wanting war to take place. They had been to Dvarka 
because they knew that Sri Krishna was a powerful person 
with a large army behind him, and both wanted assistance 
from this Yadava hero. One got the army, and the other got 
nothing except Sri Krishna himself alone, a single 
individual who said, “I shall do nothing. Whoever wants 
the army called Narayani Sena, which is invincible, can take 
it; and whoever wants me, unarmed and doing nothing, 
may take me.” Duryodhana did not want an unarmed 
individual who was only going to be a liability to him. He 
said, “I want the army.” Arjuna said, “I want you.” Anyway, 
the idea of war was in their minds even at the beginning. It 
is not that Arjuna suddenly changed his mind in the 
35 
 


===== PAGE 36 / 266 =====

battlefield. Something psychologically unexpected took 
place. His emotions were stirred up by feelings connected 
with certain relationships which should not be the guiding 
principles in a battlefield. 
Here is a briefly stated historical background of the 
commencement of the Bhagavadgita as located in the 
Mahabharata context. But it has also a spiritual 
connotation, and it is meant for each one of us. We take to 
spiritual life, the way of Yoga, by which we mean that we 
are after union with reality. What kind of reality? Each one 
of us has his own or her own concept of it. You leave your 
house or office, or whatever it is, and go to an ashram or a 
Yoga centre and say, “I shall learn the art of union with 
reality—Yoga practice.”  
Firstly, the notion of reality is not clear in the mind. 
Whatever your consciousness encounters and believes to be 
real should be regarded as real for you. It is difficult to 
define what reality is. That which is subject to 
transmutation or change is not supposed to be absolutely 
real, but is perhaps relatively so. But as far as consciousness 
is concerned, it will certainly cling even to relative realities 
because though they are relative, for the time being they 
appear to be real. We see a continuity in the flow of a river, 
though we are told a thousand times that every minute new 
water is flowing; so is also the case with the burning of a 
flame in a lamp. Though everything is transitory and 
everything is moving and we are today totally different 
from what we were when we were little children—we have 
changed completely and are not static entities—yet we cling 
to our own selves as something which is relatively 
36 
 


===== PAGE 37 / 266 =====

perceptible as a workable reality. So anything that 
consciousness accepts to be worthwhile, of some utility, will 
be regarded by it as real, and cannot be rejected. The world 
is unreal in some sense, but it is real in some other sense. 
Whatever be the sense in which it is real or unreal, that 
sense is important to us.  
Now, we cannot mix up issues when we take to the path 
of spirituality, or Yoga. Communion with reality is the 
purpose of Yoga. The Bhagavadgita will try to disillusion 
the mind of Arjuna as to what is proper for him, because 
the propriety of a thing depends upon its relatedness to 
reality. A thing that is connected to unreal things, or 
phantoms, is not proper. That which is related to reality is 
proper. But what is reality? This was a confusing issue 
before Arjuna’s mind, and he fell down totally helpless 
psychologically, asking for redress of his woes: “I am here 
before you, Krishna, the great Master. I do not know what 
is good and proper for me.” 
Thus the disciple approaches the Guru. He moves 
towards the Guru in a state of distress and confusion of 
mind, sometimes looking back at the world as being not so 
bad as he thought, and at other times feeling that the world 
is worth nothing—that it is a vale of tears. This 
circumstance caught hold of Arjuna; and with this, the First 
Chapter of the Gita closes. 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
 


===== PAGE 38 / 266 =====

Chapter 3 
THE TRANSMIGRATION OF THE SOUL 
As I mentioned, the eighteen chapters of the 
Bhagavadgita constitute, in a way, stages of the 
development of the spirit of man from levels of greater 
involvement through higher and higher levels of lesser 
involvement. The worst of involvements is the picture of 
the war, the scene of the battlefield that is presented in the 
First Chapter, the Mahabharata context. Nothing can be 
worse in this world than hatred, and war is the pinnacle of 
this attitude. You dislike a thing a hundred percent, and 
more than a hundred percent; then war takes place. 
The dislike is the counterpart of what you call ‘like’ for 
certain things. It is not possible to have only one side of a 
coin, as you know. Every coin has two sides. Your dislike 
does not mean that you dislike everything. There is a like 
which is counter-correlated to that which you do not like. 
The reason for the development of this dual policy of the 
psyche, like and dislike, is the structure of the mind itself. 
Who created this peculiar structure of the mind that it 
should think only in a parochial manner, and not in a 
holistic way? It is not easy to understand merely by 
application of psychological logic, because logic of the 
mind, whatever be its precision, is again involved in this 
dual policy of the dichotomy between the subject and the 
object, as they are called philosophically. 
What does logic do, generally? It assumes a difference 
between the subject and the predicate. “Rishikesh is a holy 
place.” Grammatically, this sentence has a noun as the 
38 


===== PAGE 39 / 266 =====

subjective side and a predicate as the objective side. The 
word ‘is’, which is called a copula in a grammatical sense, 
joins the subjective side and the predicate, or the objective 
side, and then the sentence appears to be a complete 
picture. It tells you what Rishikesh is: it is a holy place. 
Okay. But for the purpose of understanding the meaning of 
this sentence, you have to dovetail these two aspects of the 
sentence, the subject and the predicate, which is achieved 
by the action of the verb, the link between the two parts of 
the sentence; so without a verb, there cannot be a sentence.  
Why should there be a necessity to separate two parts 
and then bring them together into a whole? A thing that is 
separated is always separated. It cannot be joined together 
like pieces of broken glass. There is an artificial attempt 
made by human logic to bring about a reconciliation of the 
subjective side and the objective side. 
I mentioned to you earlier that the world, including all 
created beings and humanity, stands before us as a large 
object, and the perceivers, any one of us, stand in the 
position of a subject. Our perception of anything in this 
world is an attempt to bring about a cessation of this so-
called clash between the subjective and the objective sides. 
The world does not find it easy to reconcile itself with our 
views, whims and fancies. We have seen that the world does 
not always go with us easily, nor do we find it so easy to 
harmonise ourselves entirely with the ways of the world. 
We have our own ways, and the world seems to have its 
own ways, so there is a dual face that is at the back of this 
very picture of a harmonised perception of the world. Our 
knowledge of the world, our knowledge of anything that is 
39 
 


===== PAGE 40 / 266 =====

external or objective, is this finally futile attempt in 
bringing about a real harmony between ourselves and the 
world outside. Two things cannot be harmonised, because 
they are two things. When we have already assumed that 
there are two things, bringing them together into a state of 
absolute harmony or unity is not going to be a successful 
endeavour. 
This is the reason why, in the First Chapter of the Gita, 
Arjuna found himself in a quandary. He had a subjective 
attitude and an objective attitude towards the army that was 
arrayed. He saw the army of his opponents, which is 
another way of saying that he saw an enemy in the camp. 
He also saw, at the same time, blood relations in the midst 
of the army generals, footmen, etc. You like a thing and 
dislike a thing at the same time. You are at war with your 
own brother. Because you cannot reconcile yourself with 
your brother, you are at war with him; but because he is 
your brother, you also love him. So your relationship with 
anything in this world is a love and hate complex. Neither 
do you love a thing really, nor do you hate a thing really. 
‘Really’ is the word that you have to underline. A one 
hundred percent liking for anything is not possible, because 
there is a rejection of certain facts and factors in that very 
act of yours. Nor is it possible to hate a thing one hundred 
percent, because there is an internal connection of that 
which you hate with your own self. There is an organismic 
relation of yourself with the structure of the world; 
therefore, wholesale hatred is not possible. But because of 
your organic connection with things in the structure of the 
40 
 


===== PAGE 41 / 266 =====

universe, wholesale love is also not possible due to the 
factor of alienation of the object from yourself. 
This is the reason, we may say, why Arjuna found 
himself in a difficult situation: to do or not to do—or, as 
Shakespeare put it, to be or not to be, etc. Arjuna found 
himself in a situation comparable with Hamlet. Some 
people say that Hamlet represents thought without action, 
and Othello represents action without thought. Arjuna 
found himself in this peculiar situation. He was torn to 
pieces. He went deep enough to find no ground on which 
to stand. He expresses his tragic condition: “My mind is 
reeling, my intellect is not functioning, my hairs stand on 
end, my skin is burning, my prana is agitated, I am 
drooping completely.” This is to say, he was drooping in all 
the five sheaths of his personality. The five sheaths are 
called Annamaya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya 
and Anandamaya Koshas. The physical body is called the 
Annamaya Kosha, the vital body is called the Pranamaya 
Kosha, the mental body is called the Manomaya Kosha, the 
intellectual body is called the Vijnanamaya Kosha, and the 
causal body is called the Anandamaya Kosha. All the five 
sheaths of the spirit of Arjuna were about to crack. They 
were giving way due to the sorrow in which he found 
himself. “Therefore, I do not know what my duty is in this 
predicament.” Though he said that it is not possible to 
clearly see what his duty is, he had already made a decision 
within himself not do to anything. Though he was not in a 
position to decide what to do, he seems to somehow have 
made an attempt to decide things for himself by saying, 
“Down with bows and arrows!”: visṛjya saśaraṁ cāpaṁ 
41 
 


===== PAGE 42 / 266 =====

śokasaṁvignamānasaḥ (Gita 1.47). When you cannot 
understand a thing, you are not supposed to make a 
decision on it. A confused state of mind is unfit for making 
decisions of any kind. He knew that he was confused, and 
therefore he had no right to come to any conclusion 
whether to do or not to do. 
We are facing the world, this universe of the 
Mahabharata scripture. The confrontation of the subjective 
individual with the objective universe is the Mahabharata 
war. The Bhagavadgita is a spiritual gospel. It is not a 
historical document, a story of what happened some years 
back. It is clothed in the garb of a story, as it were, and it 
appears to be a novel message, a didactic poem; but it is 
deeply spiritual. As I mentioned to you the other day, it is a 
gospel of eternity. It is an eternal message for all time, for 
all people, in every condition. Whatever be your mental 
condition at any time, you will find some verse or the other 
about your position. 
Sri Krishna was there as Arjuna’s charioteer. This long 
harangue of Arjuna was received with dismay by Sri 
Krishna. “At this hour, when you are face to face with a 
difficulty, you say that there is no difficulty, and you come 
to the conclusion that the best thing is not to do anything. 
But you are a hero, and the problem has to be solved. The 
Mahabharata is a world problem, and when the problem 
raises itself before you, you are saying, ‘Inasmuch as I 
cannot understand the meaning of the problem, I will 
refuse to solve it. I will go by the idea that it does not exist 
at all.’ Is it all right? What do you say?” In one sentence Sri 
Krishna rebukes Arjuna and says, “How come this mood 
42 
 


===== PAGE 43 / 266 =====

has overpowered you in this predicament? Very strange 
indeed!”  
Then Arjuna again speaks, in the beginning of the 
Second Chapter. “Did I not explain myself properly? My 
love goes for my own elders on whose lap I sat, and who 
gave me education and taught me the art of archery. And 
my own brethren, kinsmen, are arrayed in front of me—the 
Kurus, whose blood also flows through my veins. What 
benefit can accrue to me by opposing my own kinsmen, my 
own well-wishers, my own elders?”  
The answer of Sri Krishna is the Second Chapter of the 
Bhagavadgita, commencing from the eleventh verse. 
Aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ prajñāvādāṁś ca bhāṣase, 
gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca nā ‘nuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ (Gita 2.11): 
“You speak as if you know everything. Very wise words you 
have spoken before me, while actually these are unwise 
words. You are grieving over the consequence that may 
follow from engaging yourself in this vast conflict-ridden 
field. You are taking your stand on an opinion that you 
hold on the question of life and death itself—whether it is 
good to live or to die. You are trying to answer this 
question by your own parochial logic, your limited 
understanding.”  
Birth and death are the scenes through which 
everything in the world passes. The process of evolution, 
so-called, is the process of perpetual dying and perpetually 
being born. Evolution is the requirement on the part of 
every entity in this world to cease to be what it is at this 
moment and be another thing after some time. There is a 
transmutation and a metempsychosis—a transmigration, 
43 
 


===== PAGE 44 / 266 =====

you may say—of the special conditions under which an 
individual is living; and even when you appear to be whole 
and single, a solid individual like any one of us, every cell of 
your body is transmuting itself every moment. Medical 
men say that every seven years all the cells of the body 
renew themselves. So there is a complete cellular 
transformation of your personality three times by the time 
you reach twenty-one years, and then it is that you are 
supposed to be mature.  
Apart from that, there is a metabolic process going on 
in the body. Anyone who knows physiology will know what 
metabolism is. The anabolic and catabolic processes 
combined are called metabolism. There is a continuous 
change taking place in this body. On account of the 
attachment of consciousness to these processes that are 
taking place from moment to moment, you are unable to 
know that these changes are occurring in your body. You 
now have become something else from the condition in 
which you were many years back as a little baby or a child. 
There is a difference between your babyhood long ago and 
your adulthood just now, but you do not perceive this 
difference because of the continuity of an undivided 
consciousness which you really are. 
An iron rod is made up of little particles of iron. If it is 
heated until it becomes red hot, the particles cannot be 
seen; only the radiance, the red heat, is visible. In a similar 
manner, every limb of the body, from the fingertips to the 
toes, appears to be a completeness. The whole body feels 
the touch of a little toe or a little finger, due to the fact that 
there is a consciousness pervading this entire organism. If 
44 
 


===== PAGE 45 / 266 =====

this divisibility of consciousness were not to be there, every 
part of the body would look disjointed. One hand would 
not know the existence of the other hand, and one limb 
would not cooperate with another organ of the body. But 
every little cell and part of the body, every little limb, goes 
on working in such system, method and harmony that you 
feel that you are one integrality, one whole. “I am coming,” 
you sometimes say. Who is coming? Is the nose coming, are 
the ears coming, are the legs coming or are the hands 
coming? Which is coming? It is a consciousness that is 
actually making this statement: “I am coming.” And the 
movement of the legs and the seeing of the eyes and other 
activities of the limbs are effects that follow from the order 
that is issued by this integral consciousness. 
Actually, consciousness cannot die. The concept of the 
death of consciousness is itself invalid. You can imagine 
that you are not there, but you cannot imagine that you are 
not thinking in that fashion. The denial of a thing also 
implies a consciousness of the denial of that thing. You may 
abolish the consciousness of anything in this world, but you 
cannot abolish the consciousness of the fact that you are 
trying to abolish it. So there is some consciousness at the 
back of all things. 
Sri Krishna starts his gospel by saying the Atman is 
immortal. Na tv evā ‘haṁ jātu nā ‘saṁ na tvaṁ neme 
janādhipāḥ (Gita 2.11): “We were never non-existent at any 
time—neither you nor I, nor these kinsmen called the 
Kauravas. They have always existed, and shall ever exist. 
Non-existence of the basic entity of individuality is 
unthinkable. The people you refer to, and yourself also, are 
45 
 


===== PAGE 46 / 266 =====

actually embodiments of consciousness. Consciousness 
cannot be perishable; it cannot be temporal; it cannot pass 
through the process of evolution. That is to say, it cannot be 
one thing now and another thing afterwards.”  
I mentioned that evolution implies the cessation of one 
condition of a thing and the occurrence of another 
condition of it, the rebirth into a new form of species, as it 
were, which is the characteristic of the individuality but not 
the characteristic of consciousness. If you imagine that 
consciousness also evolves, there will be a cessation of it 
sometime and a re-emergence of it afterwards. You cannot 
have a cessation of consciousness because even when you 
imagine consciousness has ceased, you are aware that you 
are aware of the cessation of consciousness. So 
consciousness never ceases. Inasmuch as it does not cease, 
it is eternal. 
When I speak of consciousness, I am actually referring 
to the Sanskrit word ‘Atman’ because you may be able to 
understand the meaning of ‘consciousness’ much better 
than the implications of Atman. Atman, consciousness, 
cannot perish, because the idea of consciousness perishing 
is there at the back and will not permit you to even 
entertain such a thought. Consciousness has to be there at 
the back of even the attempt to abolish the idea of 
consciousness. This is one aspect of the matter. 
Consciousness cannot perish. It is not temporal. It will not 
die. It is always there. It transcends time. It is conscious of 
the process of time. Consciousness is conscious of the 
process 
of 
time; 
therefore, 
it 
transcends 
time. 
Consciousness is conscious of the extension of space; 
46 
 


===== PAGE 47 / 266 =====

therefore, it transcends space. The conclusion is that 
consciousness is neither involved in space, nor is it involved 
in time; therefore, it is neither finite spatially nor finite 
temporally. It is infinite and eternal. If that is so, there can 
be only one consciousness. If there are two consciousnesses, 
there would be a necessity to bring about a rapprochement 
of the two states of consciousness, which imagines that 
there are two, three, or many consciousnesses. There would 
be the necessity to posit someone who is aware of the 
existence of multiple consciousnesses. Who is it that is 
saying that there are three consciousnesses or four 
consciousnesses? That person, that thing which is aware of 
three consciousnesses must be above the region of the 
activity of the three consciousnesses, so it should be only 
one consciousness appearing. You can imagine what the 
conclusion is, finally. Consciousness is one only.  It is 
universal in its nature, eternal, non-spatial, non-temporal. 
That alone is, and nothing else can be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 


===== PAGE 48 / 266 =====

Chapter 4 
THE TOTAL PICTURE OF CREATION 
Bhagavan Sri Krishna held the opinion that Arjuna was 
lacking sankhya, which means proper understanding, and I 
endeavoured to tell you that sankhya is the knowledge of 
the placement of a person in this universe. Unless you 
know where you are placed in this universe, your location 
in this setup of things, you will not be able to do anything. 
Work, activity—doing anything whatsoever, and any 
motion for that purpose—is guided by the circumstances 
prevailing at that given moment of time. ‘Circumstance’ 
means the knowledge of the location of the person at a 
given moment of time. 
Now, your location in this universe can be known only 
by a study of the whole process of creation. Doctrines of 
creation are adumbrated in schools of thought such as the 
Sankhya and the Vedanta. I mentioned to you previously in 
the context of the discussion of the nature of consciousness 
that the primary principle is the pure ‘I-amness’, Pure 
Consciousness adapting and adjusting itself to its own Self, 
as it were. The Sankhya calls this indivisible absolute 
consciousness Purusha. You may call it by any other 
name—God, if you like, the Supreme Absolute. It is 
absolute because it is not related to anything outside. It is a 
non-related, indivisible omnipresence, conscious of itself 
alone, and there is no consciousness of anything else. ‘I am 
what I am’—aham asmi. This is the consciousness of the 
Supreme Purusha. 
48 
 


===== PAGE 49 / 266 =====

The process of creation is supposed to start with the 
emergence of the activity of Prakriti, which is the cosmic 
impulsion of this Universal Consciousness to delimit itself 
in a certain fashion for the projection of this cosmos. As I 
mentioned, this Prakriti, this cosmic impulsive objectivity, 
is made up of three forces called sattva, rajas and tamas—
dynamis, stasis and equilibration. Prakriti, so-called, is 
compared to a rope with strands. You must have seen coir 
ropes or jute ropes, etc., with three entwined strands. The 
rope is not different from the strands. You cannot say the 
strands are the qualities or the properties of the rope. Many 
times people say sattva, rajas, tamas are the qualities of 
Prakriti. This is an understatement, really speaking, because 
these three properties constitute the very substance of 
Prakriti itself, just as the three strands of the rope are the 
rope itself. The threefold operation of sattva, rajas, tamas is 
itself Prakriti. Therefore, Prakriti may be said to be activity 
minus the consciousness of Universality, and Purusha is 
consciousness of Universality without activity. 
Sankhya has a humorous analogy to describe how 
Purusha and Prakriti work together in collaboration 
because, as I mentioned, Purusha consciousness is universal 
awareness minus activity or motion, and Prakriti is only 
motion or activity minus consciousness. So how can these 
two, inactive consciousness and active unconsciousness, be 
clubbed together? 
The analogy of the Sankhya philosophy describes two 
persons, one who is blind but can walk, and another who is 
lame but can see. These two people join together because 
they both want to move in the same direction. But how is it 
49 
 


===== PAGE 50 / 266 =====

possible? Without legs they cannot move, and without eyes 
they also cannot move. So the lame person sits on the 
shoulders of the blind person, and now there is a joint 
action of seeing and moving. The lame person who sits on 
the shoulders of the blind walking person can see, and 
directs him where to go, and so it is a very good 
understanding between them. This is how Sankhya gives 
you a humorous comparison of the manner in which 
perhaps Universal Consciousness, which is inactive, 
operates in conjunction with the activity of Prakriti, which 
is unconscious. When these two processes are blended 
together and Purusha and Prakriti jointly act, what happens 
first is that Prakriti, in its sattva aspect, reflects the 
Universal Consciousness within itself, as light can be 
reflected in a glass. The glass here, which is sattva, is not 
perfectly clean where the light passes unaffected and 
undisturbed, but there is a little disturbance and the 
consciousness, which is universal Purusha, gets delimited to 
some extent, though in a very insignificant manner. 
Sattva is all-pervadingness. The consciousness of 
omnipresence and all-pervadingness is sattva. In Pure 
Consciousness, there is no such thing as all-pervadingness, 
and so on. We cannot say that consciousness is all-
pervading unless we define it in terms of Prakriti’s sattva 
guna, because a thing can be all-pervading only when there 
is a space to pervade. As space is a part of Prakriti, then 
Purusha, which is independent of Prakriti, cannot be said to 
be all-pervading in a strictly logical sense. It is just Being-
as-such, Pure I-am, and cannot be called all-pervading. But 
it appears to be all-pervading on account of its reflection in 
50 
 


===== PAGE 51 / 266 =====

the sattva guna of Prakriti, which also has other qualities—
rajas and tamas. It does not mean that Prakriti is only pure 
sattva, all-pervadingness. It also has, under its arm, the 
projective forces or factors known as rajas and tamas. On 
account of a subtle apperception of rajas and tamas also, 
together with sattva, there is a slight limitedness imposed 
on the reflection of consciousness in the sattva guna of 
Prakriti. And then what happens? After Purusha there is 
Prakriti, and after Prakriti there is Mahat. Mahat is the 
third principle—Cosmic-consciousness, the Pure I-am, Be-
ness-as-such. The Absolute Existence becomes conscious as 
all-pervading, omnipresent. This Mahat, or the Great Being 
Mahat-tattva, is omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent. 
This is the God of the universe, you may say if you like. 
Pure God, by Himself, creates nothing. He is just All-in-
All. Creativity is attributed to God on account of His so-
called reflection in the sattva omnipresence of Prakriti, and 
God becomes Mahat-tattva, also known as Hiranyagarbha 
in 
Vedanta 
terminology. 
The 
pure 
potential 
of 
consciousness prior to the manifestation of Mahat in terms 
of Prakriti is called Ishvara, which is something like the 
cosmos sleeping. Sleeping is not an inactive condition; it is 
a dormant potential of future activity. So in Ishvara-tattva, 
which is the potential of Universal Consciousness coming 
in conjunction with Prakriti as a whole, we have Ishvara-
tattva. This is a term which is not in the Sankhya but in the 
Vedanta doctrine. Mahat may be said to be Hiranyagarbha, 
the 
all-knowing 
creative 
principle, 
omnipresent, 
omniscient, 
omnipotent 
consciousness. 
When 
omnipresence 
becomes 
conscious 
of 
itself—I-am, 
51 
 


===== PAGE 52 / 266 =====

omnipresent—it becomes cosmic Ahamkara. So first is 
Purusha, second is Prakriti, third is Mahat, fourth is 
Ahamkara. Ahamkara here is to be understood as Cosmic 
Self-awareness—the whole universe becoming conscious: ‘I 
am.’ It is not merely omnipresence as such; it is 
consciousness of one’s being omnipresent.  
In the state of Ahamkara, Cosmic I-amness, or 
consciousness of one’s being omnipresent, a threefold 
activity is supposed to take place: the threefold division of 
the supreme Self-consciousness into the subjective 
perceiver adhyatma, the objective universe adhibhuta, and 
a third connecting link adhidaiva, about which I mentioned 
already. The trouble of creation starts at this stage. Until 
this time, it was all paradise, glory, all-pervading bliss, God 
roaming alone in the Garden of Eden; there was no Adam 
and Eve, nothing of the kind. Wonder! This wonder gets 
clouded when this Cosmic I-amness decides to divide itself 
into three, and beholds itself as three. For example, your 
body has a trunk, a right hand and a left hand. The right 
hand is totally different from the left hand. If you can 
suppose that the right hand has a consciousness, and with 
that consciousness it can know the existence of the left 
hand, this will be adhyatma and adhibhuta. But it cannot 
know the existence of the left hand except through the 
body, of which it is a part. So the entire body is the 
transcendent connecting link which makes it possible for 
the adhyatma to be aware that there is adhibhuta. 
Now, I mentioned that there is a threefold division of 
this universal omnipresence—adhyatma, adhibhuta and 
adhidaiva. The adhibhuta prapancha, or the universe of 
52 
 


===== PAGE 53 / 266 =====

material existence, we may say, is originally a space-time 
vibration complex. Even today, physical scientists and 
philosophers of physical science say that the whole universe 
is basically space-time. Space, time and motion—this is the 
beginning of creation. Space means a sudden vacuum, as it 
were, created before the omnipresence. In order that you 
may become something other than what you are, you have 
to cease to be what you are at present. If God has to become 
the object, He has to cease to be the subject. Now, He 
cannot cease to be the subject as He is the Pure Subject, so a 
sudden vacuous condition is created, as perhaps is done by 
a juggler who creates an illusion. Suddenly a thing which is 
not there will be projected before you. Your consciousness 
is interfered with by the juggler’s magic or his slight-of-
hand. Immediately he creates a vacuous condition of your 
mind by his action so that you forget what you saw and you 
begin to see what is not there. God may be playing His 
magical trick, as it were. God is sometimes called 
Mahamaya, which means the Great Juggler who can project 
a thing which is not there. God created the heaven and the 
Earth, says the Bible. Out of what substance did He create 
them? Out of his own body, which is something very funny 
to say. And if there is nothing outside God, out of what 
substance did He create it? He created it out of a vacuum, a 
kind of nothingness. 
You will find later on, by a deep analysis of the process 
of creation, that creation is a vacuous projection. It has no 
substance by itself because substance is God only, and if the 
universe also had a substance independently, there would 
be a conflict between the two substances—God and Satan, 
53 
 


===== PAGE 54 / 266 =====

as certain theologies posit. There is no Satan; he does not 
exist outside God. It is only a theological conception of 
human frailty, I may say, which is unable to locate evil in 
this world because it does not know where it exists. The 
Satanic, the evil, the bad, etc., must exist somewhere. It 
cannot exist in God, and it cannot exist outside God, so 
where does it exist? This is the theological problem before 
all religious people. Anyway, we shall not touch that subject 
now. 
God seems to be creating a vacuous situation to create a 
universe that is also basically a vacuum. Hence, there is 
non-substantiality in the whole universe. Everyone, 
everything, including you and I, are basically vacuous. 
There is no substance in us. The substance is only a 
jugglery. It is a mix-up of space-time and certain elements 
which I will mention to you afterwards. Thus, creation 
might have taken place, or creation might not have taken 
place. You may say the juggler has really created something 
because you can see it, and therefore God has created the 
world because you are seeing it. But the juggler has created 
nothing; he has only put you under the pressure of an 
influence. In the same way, God has created no world, but 
somehow or other some illusion has caught hold of you—
this consciousness. You do not know how you are seeing 
what the juggler is doing, though he has done nothing. In 
the same way, God has done something like the greatest 
juggler, and you are seeing a world which is really not there. 
Finally you will see, if the curtain is lifted, God alone is 
permeating the whole thing. This so-called world is nothing 
54 
 


===== PAGE 55 / 266 =====

but scintillating God. That is what you will realise 
afterwards, about which you will be told a little later. 
So the objective universe, which is adhibhuta, starts 
with space, time and vibration. This vibration is fivefold in 
its nature. In Sanskrit, these five aspects of vibration are 
called shabda, which means the potential of sound, sparsha, 
the potential of touch, rupa, the potential of sight, rasa, the 
potential of taste, and gandha, the potential of smell. The 
whole universe of perception is constituted of these fivefold 
forces. What do you see in this world? What do you mean 
by ‘the world’? What is called ‘world’ is nothing but what 
you hear, touch, see, taste, and smell. Suppose you do not 
see anything, and you cannot touch or smell or taste; the 
world vanishes for you. So the world is nothing but a 
bundle of sensations; it looks like that.  
There is a great history behind this question of whether 
there is a substance behind sensations or whether the world 
is made up of sensations only. Subjective philosophers in 
the West, such as Berkeley, concluded that the whole world 
is nothing but sensations only. If these five sensations are 
removed from you, there will be no world, and your body 
will also not be there. But a difficulty arises in the mind due 
to its very structure because it believes the sensations are 
sensing something, and if something is not there to be 
sensed, what are the senses going to sense?  
A question was put to Berkeley. “My dear Father,” (he 
was a clergyman) “what are your senses sensing if there is 
nothing to be sensed?” So he modified his doctrine a little, 
and his pure subjective idealism of only sensations got 
transformed into what is called objective idealism. The 
55 
 


===== PAGE 56 / 266 =====

senses cannot know that the world exists unless the 
sensations operate. So inasmuch as the sensations tell you 
through their media of what may exist outside, you are 
seeing the world as conditioned by your sensations; the real 
world is not seen by you. The real world is cast in the 
mould of your sensations, and so you are not seeing the 
world as it is. You are seeing only the thing-as-such, as you 
may call it, but what that thing-as-such is, nobody knows, 
as it is cast in the mould of the five sensations.  
But Berkeley agrees that something should be there in 
order that the senses may sense. That is God’s mind. The 
universe is God’s mind, the Cosmic Mind, which looks like 
a world in front of you; but you are not actually seeing the 
Cosmic Mind. You are not seeing God with your eyes; you 
are only sensing, in a distracted, fivefold manner, this one 
indivisible thing which is otherwise the Cosmic Mind. You 
are lodged in the mind of God even now, accepted; but you 
cannot touch Him, you cannot see Him, because your 
sensations are diversified. These diversified functions are 
connected with these potentials, as I mentioned—shabda, 
sparsha, rupa, rasa, gandha. These are forces. 
Afterwards, these forces congeal into solidity in a 
particular permutation and combination process. These 
congealed forms of the five forces shabda, sparsha, rupa, 
rasa, gandha become space—or sky, as it is called—and air, 
fire, water, earth. In Sanskrit, sky or space is called akasha, 
air is vayu, agni is fire, apas is water, pritvi is earth. So this 
world of the physical elements of earth, water, fire, air, 
ether, space and sky—this world which you value so much, 
on which you are seated, which is attracting you and 
56 
 


===== PAGE 57 / 266 =====

repelling you at the same time—is just the last 
concretisation of these forces shabda, sparsha, rupa, rasa, 
gandha which are the vibrations of space and time, which is 
one aspect of this cosmic omnipresence, Ahamkara. Thus, 
the objective side has been explained. 
Now we come to the subjective side, which is adhyatma. 
This is, for all practical purposes, the human individual: 
ourselves. I have mentioned to you what the world is made 
of; now I am telling you what you are made of as adhyatma. 
The Universal Consciousness, having objectified itself as 
the universe outside in the manner mentioned, now 
subjectifies itself in another manner as the perceiver of the 
universe. As I mentioned, God created a vacuous situation, 
as it were, an unconsciousness prior to the act of creation; 
and an unconsciousness also precedes the creation of the 
individuality. You are divested of your universal 
connection with the Almighty before you are born as an 
individual. You cannot be an individual and God at the 
same time because God-consciousness and individual 
consciousness cannot stand together, as individual 
consciousness is localised and God-consciousness is 
universal. So in order that you may become individual, you 
have to be cast out of the Garden of Eden. Adam and Eve 
quit the Garden of Eden, and you cannot go back. An angel 
is standing there with a flaming sword lest you try to enter 
the Garden of Eden again. You have disobeyed the 
Universal Consciousness by tasting the forbidden fruit, 
whatever that fruit be. We shall look into it later on. 
So the Universal God casts this potential of 
individuality outside the Kingdom of God, the Garden of 
57 
 


===== PAGE 58 / 266 =====

Eden, heaven, Universality; but you have to become totally 
oblivious of your having any connection with Universal 
Consciousness before you are cast to the Earth, so 
immediately unconsciousness pervades. This is the sleeping 
condition which represents that state. Whenever you are 
asleep or in a mood of unconsciousness or sleepiness, you 
are actually in the potential of that state into which you 
were thrown at the time of creation, and you revert to it 
again and again every day for various reasons, which is a 
different subject. 
Now, as God created the objective universe by a 
vacuous background, individuality is projected by a 
subjective vacuous background. Sanskrit would call this 
condition the Anandamaya Kosha, the causal sheath. As the 
Universal projects itself objectively through the medium of 
vacuous background and space and time, the Universal 
Consciousness manifests itself individually through this 
individual vacuous condition which is the Anandamaya 
Kosha, the causal body. And this manifestation is called 
intellect—the buddhi, as it is called. So even intellect is not a 
real safe guide, as it is a distorted reflection of the Universal 
Consciousness through this muddled background which is 
the vacuous unconsciousness, the Anandamaya Kosha.  
Hence, the greatest learning in this world is only a kind 
of darkness, finally. It is a distorted knowledge. You are 
seeing 
things 
topsy-turvy. 
This 
so-called 
boasted 
understanding of yours, this intellect, is wrongly telling you 
that the world is outside and you are separate from it, while 
actually you have an organic connection because the 
subject-object-transcendent connecting link are all part and 
58 
 


===== PAGE 59 / 266 =====

parcel of the one Universal Omnipresence. But what makes 
you feel that the world is outside you? It is this stupid 
reflection that has completely distorted itself through 
passing through this vacuous sleep condition and then 
peeping through this muddled state through the fivefold 
sense organs and seeing five things, as it were. You are 
seeing only five things in this world: that which you can 
hear, see, touch, taste, and smell. If you had twenty different 
senses, you would see twenty different things in the 
universe. 
The intellect is, therefore, not a very safe guide for us, 
and so it is said that God-realisation cannot take place 
merely by the activity of the intellect. It is helpful as a 
pointer to the limitation of its own region of action. It can 
tell you “thus far and no further”; but it cannot take you 
further, so you should not entirely depend upon intellectual 
ratiocination. There is another, deeper thing in you, which 
is the spirit that has to be contacted by another means 
altogether—by the act of meditation. So, individually, 
subjectively, as adhyatma, the Universal manifests itself 
through this condition of sleep as an intellect, and then it 
becomes a more delimited means of consciousness, called 
mind. 
Universal Consciousness gets reflected through the 
Anandamaya Kosha, the Vijnanamaya Kosha or intellect, 
and the Manomaya Kosha or mind. The mind can think in 
an indistinct manner but cannot come to logical judgments. 
Judgments are passed only by the intellect, which is the 
reason. So there are two different functions performed by 
intellect and mind. Mind is called manas, and intellect is 
59 
 


===== PAGE 60 / 266 =====

called buddhi. The ratiocinating and logically deciding 
factor is buddhi, or intellect; the pure indeterminate 
perception is the cognition of the mind. Suppose you see 
something at a distance, and you feel something is standing 
there. The mind indistinctly becomes aware: something is 
there. “I am cognising that something is there, and am 
aware of something in front of me.” But what it is, it cannot 
say. The intellect decides whether it is a human being or a 
lamppost. The decision as to the fact of the case is taken by 
the intellect; indistinct perception is the work of the mind. 
Now, the intellect and the mind work in terms of the 
five senses—hearing, touching, seeing, tasting and smelling. 
Neither the mind nor the intellect can work independently, 
totally free from the activities of the sense organs, so the 
world that you perceive, that which you cognise through 
the mind or understand through the intellect, is a sense 
world. Again we come to this contradiction and difficulty 
created by objective idealism and subjective idealism, as I 
mentioned in the case of Berkeley, Hegel, etc. 
The senses, therefore, are five, as mentioned. They are 
conjoined with the mental sheath as well as the intellectual 
sheath. Below these two intellectual and mental sheaths that 
go together with the five senses, there is the vital sheath, 
which is the Pranamaya Kosha. The vital breath, the 
breathing process, the energy that you feel in your system, 
is due to the prana that is operating. As there are five 
sensations, there are also five functions of the prana. The 
prana operates when you breathe out. The apana operates 
when you breathe in. When you take a breath inside, it is 
pulled down. That downward pull is caused by apana. 
60 
 


===== PAGE 61 / 266 =====

When you breathe out, there is an expulsion taking place; 
the breath is thrown out. This is done by the prana. So you 
have two functions, prana and apana, the upward and the 
downward breath. There is a third, called vyana, which 
circulates throughout the body and causes blood 
circulation, etc. It is pervasive in its action. Udana is in the 
throat. It works as the deglutition process when you eat 
food and drink water. The food that you eat cannot go 
inside unless that udana is operating; otherwise, it will stick 
in your throat. Udana performs three functions: firstly, it 
causes the deglutition of food, the swallowing of your diet; 
secondly, it takes you to the state of deep sleep every day; 
thirdly, it takes you to the other world when you cast off 
this body. It is udana that will take you up to the other 
realm. So we have prana, apana, vyana, udana. The fifth 
function is samana, which works in the gastric region, the 
naval spot, and causes the digestion of food. Prana, apana, 
vyana, udana, samana—these are the five functions of the 
vital energy, which constitute another sheath altogether, the 
Pranamaya Kosha, the vital sheath.  
Last is the physical sheath. This is made up of the five 
elements earth, water, fire, air and sky. This bone, flesh, 
marrow, tendon and the weight that you feel in yourself are 
the sum and substance of the physical elements. So here 
you have the description of the subjective universe of 
human individuality. There are five koshas. Anandamaya 
Kosha is the causal sheath, Vijnanamaya Kosha is the 
intellectual sheath, Manomaya Kosha is the mental sheath, 
Pranamaya Kosha is the vital sheath, and Annamaya Kosha, 
the physical sheath. Anna means food. This body is 
61 
 


===== PAGE 62 / 266 =====

sustained by the food and drink that you take. Therefore, it 
is called Annamaya Kosha. It is a purely material 
conglomeration.  
So what are we as human individuals? We are the 
physical body charged with energy by the vital body, 
together with the thinking process of the mind, the 
understanding of the intellect, and confusion at the back of 
it. We are guided by confusion in the beginning, and all our 
life in this world is a big mass of blunder, as you will realise 
later on, because whatever be the appurtenances that you 
have, they are finally projections of this vacuous muddle, 
about which the less said the better. You are seeing 
everything upside-down, the inside as the outside, the 
outside as the inside, as you see your face in a mirror—right 
looks like left and left looks like right; or as you stand on 
the bank of the river, the head, which is the highest, looks 
lowest, and the feet, which are the lowest, look uppermost. 
This is what is happening to you in your attempt at 
perception. All human perception is, therefore, defective 
perception. You never see a real world. You are seeing an 
unreal world in front of you. This is a great consolation for 
you that you are seeing finally an unreal world, and you 
yourself are an unreal individual. The reality is the cosmic 
existence, in the Purusha, Prakriti, Mahat and Ahamkara 
Tattva, Ishvara, Hiranyagarbha and Virat. Only when you 
touch this Universal Being are you safe; and until that time, 
you are in a fool’s paradise. You are in a very great, 
interesting Disneyland. This is this wonderful world! 
Now I have told you everything about creation. This is 
Sankhya knowledge. Arjuna knows nothing about it. “You 
62 
 


===== PAGE 63 / 266 =====

are a foolish man. You are only seeing Kurus in front of 
you, army generals and Kurukshetra. This is such a limited 
view, like a man thinking only in terms of his family—his 
wife and children, and his business. He does not know 
anything else in the world. Whatever is happening is within 
his room, in his house, and that is the whole world for him. 
Arjuna, are you like that? There is a vaster vision before 
you: Sankhya. You do not know Sankhya; therefore, you 
also do not know the implementation of this knowledge 
with this world, which is Yoga.” 
The whole of the Second Chapter of the Bhagavadgita is 
confined to this discussion of Sankhya and Yoga. Actually, 
the Bhagavadgita, in its original verses, does not go into 
detail of all these things mentioned just now. Something 
about it will be told in later chapters, but not in such 
categorisation, which is knowledge that I have provided to 
you from other sources. 
This is the process of jnana, of Sankhya, of knowledge 
of the whole universe. Now you know where you are 
standing. Are you in Rishikesh? Where are you sitting now? 
Your head will start reeling. But if your head reels with this 
knowledge, it is a blessing to you. Let it reel; no harm. It is 
reeling because of the giddiness caused by the stupendous 
knowledge that has taken place within. 
I told you that this Ahamkara-tattva has divided itself 
into a threefold function. There is adhibhuta prapancha, 
the world of objective perception, and adhyatma. But the 
magical trick of the juggler also requires that you must see 
this jugglery. It is not enough if the jugglery goes on and 
nobody sees it, because then the drama is not complete. So 
63 
 


===== PAGE 64 / 266 =====

a third action is instituted by this wondrous juggler. He 
himself stands midway. The juggler is standing between the 
jugglery and yourself, the audience, and he performs his 
trick. That is the transcendent element. You cannot see the 
juggler. He suddenly vanishes. When the jugglery is 
performed, you see only what is performed. The man is 
absent. You do not know where he has gone. 
God absents Himself for the sake of making you feel 
that He is present in the objective world. The juggler 
vanishes for the time being so that you may be befooled 
into the perception of there being something outside the 
juggler. Here is the world in front of you, and you cannot 
see the juggler in the middle. Thus, this transcendent 
consciousness between the subjective side and objective 
side cannot be seen. I am seeing you, you are seeing me, but 
you cannot know how you are seeing me and I am seeing 
you. There is something between us which is more 
important than you and the world that you see, and unless 
you touch this transcendent element that is between us, you 
will be completely confined to a wrong notion of your 
being somewhere and the world being somewhere else. 
These two categories of the subjective side and the objective 
side are linked together by the adhidaiva, which is the 
transcendent principle. Thus the world goes. This is the 
creation of God, or whoever it is. 
On the basis of this knowledge, you have to live in this 
world. The whole point of the Bhagavadgita is that you 
have a duty in this world. Where comes the duty? You may 
ask me, “Why should I have any duty at all? It is all done by 
God, as you already told me. Let Him do whatever He 
64 
 


===== PAGE 65 / 266 =====

likes.” Here is something very interesting for you to know. 
God has done everything; He has created this peculiar 
universe in the manner He has done. This may be true, but 
you also have some part to play in it as an individual. God 
has not suddenly created you unnecessarily. He is not an 
unjust ruler. This so-called potential of the Universal 
Consciousness to become individualised is the reason for 
the action of what is called karma. Karma is the action 
potential projected by the desire of the individual to be 
localised in one place: “I shall be only this. Let me be this 
much.”  
You once desired that you should be John, James, 
Krishna, Rama, Janaki, Radha, etc. This wish of yours is 
concretised, cast into a mould of a particular shape into 
which what is called birth takes place. Birth is the 
congealment of this desire into a form. Your body, this 
personality, this whole adhyatma that I described is the 
concrete congealed form of your wish to become only this, 
and nothing else. And you have assumed the role of a 
relative individuality in relation to other individuals who 
are also caught in that relativity. Because you are relative 
and not absolute, you are restless always. The finitude of 
your individuality, which is the relative—this relativity of 
individuality into which the consciousness has entered—
can be sustained only by its relative relation to other 
relations. I can exist only because you are there, and you 
can exist because I am there. There is a mutual give-and-
take policy of cooperation in this cosmos. Totally 
individually, nobody can exist. You will find you are 
miserable if you are alone in this universe. You want a 
65 
 


===== PAGE 66 / 266 =====

comrade. You want some relationship with something. A 
related thing can survive only with another related thing. A 
finite cannot be finite always. It has to assume the role of an 
imagined non-finite by adding to its finitude accretions of 
other finites. I become your friend, I have a talk with you, I 
take assistance from you and you take assistance from me.  
I wrongly appear to be expanding my finitude because, 
actually, the finitude has not expanded merely because I 
have other friends. Each friend is a finite by himself, and 
many finites do not make the infinite. So there is another 
mistake you are committing every day, a double mistake of 
imagining that an increase in the quantum of relationship 
will make you a little non-finite. Nothing of the kind—you 
are finite only. As you came, so you go. You came as a 
miserable individual, and as a miserable individual you go. 
But you do not want to be conscious of your miserableness 
always, so you try to obliterate that thrust of consciousness 
of finitude by imagining that you are infinite. “I have a lot 
of land. I have a lot of money. I have friends. I have family. 
What is wrong with me?” What is wrong with you will be 
told at the time of your passing from this world. Until that 
time, you will not know that. Then you will know, my dear 
friend, what kind of life you have been living. 
So this relativity consciousness, which is unable to 
survive even for a moment unless it is connected to other 
relativity, lives again in a world of tomfoolery, I should say, 
and thus we leave this world with restlessness, with anxiety, 
with no hope of any kind of respite anywhere. But we think 
and are made to believe that everything is fine in this world 
by accretions of gold, silver, money, property, friends, 
66 
 


===== PAGE 67 / 266 =====

family—all which vanish like dust and ashes when this body 
is cast off by the mind. 
This is the reason why individuality is created, which 
process is called birth. With these words, I have given you 
the total picture of creation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 


===== PAGE 68 / 266 =====

Chapter 5 
THE KARMA YOGA PRINCIPLE OF THE 
BHAGAVADGITA 
This universe was considered as the ground on which 
we based our consciousness of our duty in life. We can 
know what we ought to do only if we know where we are 
actually located in this world. Unless we know our 
circumstances—where we are standing, internally as well as 
externally, at any given moment of time—we will not be 
able to take even one step forward in any direction.  
So duty as an action incumbent upon people is based on 
the consciousness of one’s own being in relation to the 
circumstances of existence in this world. That is to say, 
Karma Yoga is based on Buddhi Yoga, as told in the 
language of the Bhagavadgita. When karma is based not on 
buddhi, proper understanding, then karma, action, 
becomes a meandering movement with no proper 
direction. You can move anywhere, in any direction, and 
do whatever you like, but that cannot be called right action. 
The philosophy of the Bhagavadgita is actually the 
science of right activity. That which is proper on your part 
is right action. But what is it that is proper on your part? 
The propriety of your behaviour and your action depends 
upon the extent to which you fit in a state of harmony to 
the atmosphere of creation as a whole. This is the reason 
why it became necessary for us to go into the details of the 
cosmological creative process as adumbrated in the 
Sankhya philosophy. 
68 
 


===== PAGE 69 / 266 =====

In what manner are you connected to this world? That 
is the manner which will decide how you have to act. Are 
you on the surface of the Earth? Are you on a hilltop? Are 
you in the desert? Are you on the sea? Are you in the midst 
of friends, or otherwise? What is also happening to you 
internally, at the same time? 
The internal and external setup of things in the context 
of the existence of a person or an individual is explained in 
the cosmology of the Sankhya. We went into great detail 
about it already so that you will have some idea as to where 
you are actually sitting at this moment. You are not sitting 
on any particular isolated location at all. In this great 
cosmological scheme of which you are one single evolute, 
you seem to be connected to everything. The entire space-
time and the stars, the whole of creation, Prakriti and 
Purusha, whatever it is, are all strung, as it were, on your 
own body and, conversely, you are strung on the body of 
this Universal Being. Hence, you are not an ordinary 
individual. 
“Arjuna, you are not a single body or son of Pandu. You 
are not sitting on the field of Kurukshetra as a geographical 
location. You are not facing the Kuru family as people 
connected with you. There is something else altogether 
behind the entire situation in which you are placed just 
now.” Even if you are going to Rishikesh market or the 
railway station here, it is not a small action that is initiated 
by you. It is a cosmological incident. The whole world 
knows what you are doing. Going to purchase a ticket from 
the station to go to Delhi or some place looks like a silly 
action, but it is nothing of the kind. The whole world 
69 
 


===== PAGE 70 / 266 =====

knows that you are purchasing the ticket—not just the 
whole world, but the whole creation up to Purusha and 
Prakriti knows it, just as the tiniest movement of a little 
finger is known by the whole body. The finger cannot say 
the body does not know what it is doing, that it is just 
moving independently. It does not move independently. 
The entire system of the physical organism is aware of every 
little scratch, touch or movement.  
There is no such thing as private action in this world. 
All activity, whether done secretly or otherwise, covertly or 
overtly, visibly or invisibly, is public. Everything that you 
think, feel and do is recorded in the documents of the skies. 
The very space-time canvas will spontaneously record 
whatever you are feeling, thinking and doing. Do not say 
that you are doing something privately in a corner of the 
room and nobody knows. There is no such thing as 
something which nobody knows. Every movement, every 
activity, every procedure, event, location and historical 
process is a cosmical movement. Therefore, in the context 
of the conflict that has arisen between you and the 
atmosphere outside called the Mahabharata battle—which 
is also your battle between you and the world outside and 
the society of people—what is your opinion, finally? 
You have a dharma, a duty. Svadharmam api cā ‘vekṣya 
na vikampitum arhasi (Gita 2.31). Do not shrink from 
doing, because doing as an act of obligation in this context 
of the world is something so incumbent that no one can 
desist from it. 
As I mentioned by way of an analogy, every part of the 
body is correlated to other parts of the body, every action of 
70 
 


===== PAGE 71 / 266 =====

every limb is the action of every other limb, everyone’s 
action is also everyone else’s action, and whatever anybody 
does is also something everybody else does. No 
independent, individual action is permissible, as is the case 
with the physical organism. Nobody does anything in this 
world, even as no limb in the body acts independently. The 
whole organism acts, and you feel as if some particular limb 
is working. When I speak, it looks as if the tongue is 
speaking, but it is not so. My entire setup in all the five 
koshas is working even when I speak, even when I see. 
So what is the role that one plays in this world of such a 
location and such an involvement in the cosmological 
scheme? Knowing that at least, you should not desist from 
doing, and do not be a coward, do not be despondent, do 
not be melancholy, do not say “I will not”. The question of 
“I will” and “I will not” does not arise in this world. No one 
has the right to say “I will”, and no one has the right to say 
“I will not”. You cannot say “I shall do”, nor can you say “I 
shall not do”. There is something imposed upon you by the 
very fact of your connection with things. And what is the 
connection? That is what you have studied last time—the 
whole Sankhya doctrine. 
Every person is placed in some particular context in this 
world. The relativity of the finite existence of an individual 
is conditioned by the relativity of other similar finite things. 
A wave in the ocean may look like a single upsurge of 
water, but there is a tremendous movement at the root of 
this body of water which so adjustably causes the 
simultaneous rise of several other waves also that you may 
say that even the movement, size and force of a single wave 
71 
 


===== PAGE 72 / 266 =====

is not merely something taking place locally in that 
particular place; it is connected to the activity of the other 
waves also because all the waves are surged forth, brought 
up to the surface by an intention of the body of water at the 
root. 
So, in a way, the relativity of the rise of a particular 
wave in the ocean—relativity in the sense that it is of a 
particular character, particular shape, particular size, 
particular direction, and so on—is due to the particularity 
of other waves that are equally responsible for this 
characterisation of a single wave and, vice versa, this 
particular wave also determines the movement of other 
waves. If the hand moves, the eyes move or the tongue 
speaks, they are all so-called differentiated movements, but 
really they are not differentiated because of the fact that all 
these actions of the different limbs taking place 
simultaneously, as it were, are one act of the will of the 
person. It should be done like that, and it is done in various 
ways through the different means of the body. 
So our duty in this world is like the characterisation of a 
particular wave in the vast sea, not independently 
motivated by itself. It has no intention of its own, though it 
may look that it is independently acting. Nobody acts with 
particularised intentions. The so-called particularity or 
individuality that you are assuming in your action is called 
egoism or ahamkara, krita bhavana, the feeling that “I am 
doing”. It is like the wave thinking that it is solely 
responsible for what it is doing, not knowing the fact that it 
has been conditioned by other waves also on the basis of 
the orders issued by the bowels of the ocean. So do not say 
72 
 


===== PAGE 73 / 266 =====

you are doing anything. The whole Bhagavadgita clinches 
its teachings here when it says the word ‘I’ should not be 
projected in your behaviour in this world. The I is only one 
in the cosmic sense; the Ahamkara-tattva of the cosmos, 
the Mahat-tattva, the Purusha and Prakriti to which we 
made reference can be considered as the I. The other I’s 
are only fragments, split parts, as it were, of this Cosmic 
I. Even in the split parts, it is only the Cosmic I that is 
operating. Even when you appear to be doing something, 
the Universal I is operating through you. But due to the 
attachment of this particular consciousness of the 
individual to the body and to the ego, each one of you 
feels wrongly that “I am doing it”.  
So your duty in this world is not actually doing 
something, but participation in the cosmic scheme of 
things. Your duty is to participate in the requirement of the 
whole cosmic setup, and not to independently do whatever 
you like from the point of view of your own egoistic 
personality. Svadharma is one’s own duty; svabhava is one’s 
own character or constitution. 
Your duty in this world is dependent on what kind of 
person you are, and how you are fitted to your own self as 
well as to society outside. Therefore, the duties that are 
required on the part of any individual cannot be uniform. It 
is not that everybody should be a businessman, everybody a 
driver, everybody a professor, everybody a yogi—nothing of 
the kind. That is not possible because whatever you are 
expected to be in this world and in what manner you are 
expected to participate in the scheme of things will depend 
upon your constitution. 
73 


===== PAGE 74 / 266 =====

This svadharma, this duty on your part, which is based 
on your own nature, actually means the dependence of your 
call of duty on the structure of your own individuality, 
which is made up of the three gunas—sattva, rajas and 
tamas. Prakriti operates in everyone right from heaven to 
earth, in the plant kingdom, in animals and in stones. Na 
tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā divi deveṣu vā punaḥ, sattvaṁ 
prakṛtijair muktaṁ yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ (Gita 
18.40). Right from heaven down to the lowermost creation 
there is nothing which is not constituted of the three gunas, 
so we are of that character. Sattva is purity, equilibrium, 
transparency, understanding, intelligence, and capacity to 
decide things in a right manner. Rajas is distraction, 
motivation in the external direction for more and more 
agitation, and restlessness. Tamas is rigidity, fixity and 
wanting nothing. All these three qualities are operating in 
us, but they are not operating in an equal proportion. It 
does not mean thirty-three-and-one-third percent of each 
quality is present in us always. As there is a larger wave and 
smaller wave in the ocean, so also there is a wave-like 
movement of these three gunas, the properties of Prakriti, 
in everything, including our own selves. 
These three properties of Prakriti’s gunas, which are 
distributed disproportionately in everyone and are never in 
equilibrium, decide the difference in one’s call of duty. If 
you are predominantly sattvic in nature, you will be fitted 
for one kind of work in this world; one type of participation 
will be expected from you in the scheme of things. If you 
are predominantly rajasic for some reason or the other, 
then you will be assigned some job, some work, some duty 
74 
 


===== PAGE 75 / 266 =====

according to your particular temperament. But suppose you 
are basically unfit for other physical reasons, such as the 
preponderance of tamas, etc.; then, you will have to be 
taken care of in a different way altogether. 
Everybody in this world has a duty to perform. You can 
ask me what this duty is, and why you should do anything. 
You should not put such questions such as why should you 
do and why should you not do. Your duty depends upon 
your automatic involvement in the cosmic setup of things, 
and so you are not simply saying you shall do or you shall 
not do. The cosmic setup itself decides in what manner you 
can be called upon to do your duty. There are degrees and 
variety in the participation of an individual in the universal 
scheme, and each person seems to be different from every 
other person. No two individuals collide or unite to become 
one individual, though there are similarities. For instance, 
when we work in a single office, factory or organisation, it 
may appear we are all doing one uniform type of work, but 
that is only on the superficial level. Basically there is an 
independence and a distinction—without difference, we 
may say—even in a common setup like an office or an 
organisation, etc. You are all students here. In a way, you 
are all uniform in your outlook, in your requirement and in 
your daily duty, but still you have an individuality of your 
own. One person does not totally merge into another 
person. Similarly, there is a tremendous variety in the call 
of duty, and yet it is rooted in a single unity of perspective.  
In this call of duty, which is your participation, you 
should not connect your performance with any fruit or 
result that may follow from it. Here is a difficulty in 
75 
 


===== PAGE 76 / 266 =====

understanding the gospel of the Bhagavadgita. We are 
always prone to think that everything we do should yield 
some result: “What shall I get if I do this?” The 
Bhagavadgita will not permit you to raise such a question. 
Can the legs ask what they will get by walking? If the hands 
raise a morsel of food and put it in the mouth, do they ask 
what they get by doing that? “Somebody is eating, and I lift 
the food.” Would you like to carry somebody’s luggage for 
nothing? And why should the hand lift the food for 
somebody else’s satisfaction? But does the hand put such a 
question? The spectacles are for the eyes, but the nose bears 
the burden. Why does the nose bear somebody’s luggage? 
Does the nose refuse? Why does each limb not demand 
satisfaction for itself and ask what it will get by doing this 
work? What does the nose get by smelling? The nose does 
not get anything by smelling. Something else gets it; and 
something else getting it is equal to the nose getting it, or 
much more than it expects.  
The more you give, the more you receive. This is the 
philosophy of spirituality. But if you grab, always demand 
what you want, you will get nothing. The receiver gets 
nothing; only the giver gets. This is a difficulty in 
understanding the psychology of spiritual existence. It is 
not business mathematics, the striking of a balance sheet, or 
arithmetic of the commercial type. It is a non-commercial, 
super-mathematical arrangement. The more you give, the 
more you get. How is it possible? You will not understand 
such a thing. You never see that by giving more you get 
more. It looks as if you are losing by giving more and more. 
The more you give out of the abundance of your own 
76 
 


===== PAGE 77 / 266 =====

personality, the less is the attachment that you will have for 
the personality and the more you will be able to participate 
in the universal setup.  
The giving aspect—I am just digressing a little from the 
main subject—is emphasised because of the fact that in 
giving, you are not giving some object; you are giving your 
own self, giving your satisfaction. The charity is in giving a 
part of your own joy. If joy is not there in giving, you have 
given nothing. Suppose you give a useless old coin to a 
beggar; you have done no charity because even by giving, 
you have lost nothing. You are still a millionaire. The 
charity has not been done in the proper proportion. 
Joy is shared in giving. Inasmuch as your joys are 
egoistic in nature, body-conditioned and not actually 
universally placed, it is good that you share your joy with 
other people. In sharing the joy, you are also sharing a little 
part of your ego, because joy and ego go together. The ego 
it is that is happy, for whatever reason. Let its happiness go 
a little bit. It pinches. Nobody likes to give anything. You 
feel sorry that something is going. The ego feels that at bit 
of it is also going, and feels great grief. Let it feel the grief so 
that the more you give as a sharing of your own joy, the 
more also is the ego part that goes with it. The less is the 
ego, the more is the universal aspect that will enter into 
you, the more spiritual you become, the more godly you 
become, and the less human, finite and drab your existence 
becomes. 
So here is a point in the expectation of no result. When 
you give charity to somebody, do you give it thinking what 
that man will give back to you? That is like a brother-in-law 
77 
 


===== PAGE 78 / 266 =====

giving to a brother-in-law. It is not charity. If a father is 
educating his son under the impression that he will take 
care of him in old age, he is not doing any charity. It is 
some kind of social work or family work. Total joy has not 
gone. He expects something. If charity is given with the 
expectation of return, it is not charity. When you arrange a 
banquet, a large feast, it is said not to invite only your 
friends because you know they will also invite you to a 
banquet one day. This is no good. If you give a banquet to 
your own relatives and invite all your friends and relations, 
know the motive behind it. Your ego swells more and more 
on account of the expectation of a very good result. If you 
arrange for a function in your house and your relatives 
come and pour gifts upon you, they will also expect you to 
give the same when they arrange for a feast or a function in 
their own homes. Otherwise, what will they feel? “This 
fellow has not given anything.” This is not charity; this is 
not giving. This is not spiritual action at all. Hence, mere 
giving in a mechanical or commercial way is not to be 
considered as charity. 
Thus, the Bhagavadgita doctrine of duty, giving, 
participation, is minus expectation of a recompense that 
will follow. You may be very worried as to what kind of 
work you are being asked to do, and do not want to simply 
drudge for no purpose. I have already given you the 
knowledge of the organism of the body. The participation 
of the limbs of the body to the body’s requirement also 
provides their own necessity, as the body sustains the legs, 
the eyes, the hands, and the nose, etc. If the stomach eats 
food, the legs and fingers also get strength, the eyes will 
78 
 


===== PAGE 79 / 266 =====

shine, and the cheeks will bloom. Why should the cheeks 
say they have no connection with your eating? If this 
universal principle is maintained behind your every act, the 
Universal Being will protect you. How it will protect you 
will come in the later chapters of the Gita. The introduction 
is laid here, in the Second Chapter. Your duty is to be the 
motive, and say not anything else; and in this participation 
of yourself in the scheme of things, which is your dharma 
based on your svabhava or your inner constitution, you will 
lose nothing and will gain everything. Ne’hā ‘bhikramanāśo 
‘sti pratyavāyo na vidyate (Gita 2.40): In doing duty one 
loses nothing. One only gains. 
You will not easily understand how you will gain a 
thing by expecting nothing from your work. It requires a 
new type of education to appreciate how it is possible that 
you can be happy and secure while you get nothing out of 
your work. It is not actually the work that is the source of 
your satisfaction; it is the connection of this work with the 
consciousness of your identity with the whole cosmos. That 
is why I am again repeating that karma is based on buddhi. 
It is not merely the work that brings results; it is the 
consciousness of your participation in the setup of the 
whole thing. 
For instance, even an ordinary fitter in a factory may 
not be divested of the consciousness of his organic relation 
with the whole setup. He is not merely doing something 
independently, unconscious of why he is doing it. A 
consciousness of unity of purpose is there even in an 
organisation such as a factory, a government, etc. If that 
consciousness of unity of purpose is not there, it is a 
79 
 


===== PAGE 80 / 266 =====

mechanical action that is being done, and he will be 
suffering, crying and cursing everybody, “How long will I 
work?” But if he knows the output will sustain him also, he 
will joyously work in a family, in an organisation. 
In this great world of duty, no one is exempt from 
action. Na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarmakṛt 
(Gita 3.5); karmaṇy evā ‘dhikāras te mā phaleṣu kadācana 
(Gita 2.47). Your duty is to act, and not to expect the fruit 
of an action. Here is the essence of the whole matter. 
Karmaṇy evā ‘dhikāras te: you have the right to work. You 
have duties, but no privileges. You will be shocked to hear 
this because you feel, “Why should I work? I will get what I 
want at the end of the month.” People sit outside factories, 
banks and offices: “I will get my salary whether I work or 
not.” This attitude arises on account of not understanding 
the connection of your very existence in this world with the 
atmosphere around. Do not go for visible satisfactions. The 
Gita will tell you that immediate, visible satisfaction will be 
the source of sorrow afterwards. In the beginning, life looks 
very hard. It pricks like a thorn, but it will give you fruit. All 
good things look bitter in the beginning but they will yield 
the sweetness of honey later on, whereas all things that bind 
you will look like honey poured into the mouth, but later 
on they will strike, and you will repent for it. 
The philosophy of the Bhagavadgita is not merely work, 
but participation in the production of a value that is 
transcendent to the action itself. When a large machine is 
working, every little part works and contributes to the 
machine’s output, the output being transcendent to the 
machine itself. The machine is an instrument, and the parts 
80 
 


===== PAGE 81 / 266 =====

are also participants. Something is automatically produced 
as a transcendent result by the participation of the parts in 
the work of this large machinery of the world. 
What follows from all this? You cannot sit quiet, nor 
can you motivate action by your own self independently. 
You are wound up inextricably, warp and woof, as in the 
fabric of a cloth, in the arrangement of things in this 
universe. Again to repeat, every individual is a cosmic 
representation, a little avatara, an incarnation, as it were, of 
God Almighty Himself. Remember the cosmic scheme 
which we described previously—Purusha, Prakriti, Mahat, 
Ahamkara. These adhibhuta, adhidaiva, adhyatma, etc., are 
all simultaneously working in you now at this very 
moment. Just now, under the roof of this building, near the 
desk at which you are sitting and the way in which you are 
positioned, the whole cosmos is working though you. And 
so you will feel secure in this world. You will not feel 
dejected: “What is there? Nobody talks to me. I get nothing 
in this world.” Do not say that. You have everything in this 
world. Your feeling that you have nothing is your sorrow. 
When you are vitally connected with the life of the whole 
universe and are joyously participating in its requirement, 
how would you say you have nothing? You can touch the 
source of the world, and it will fall to you. The abundance 
of the universe will be in your hand. The world will be at 
your beck and call. You need not cringe before the world; 
the world will cringe before you. It will fall at your feet. 
Why should you fall at the feet of other people? There are 
no other people in this world. You are connected to 
everything else.  
81 
 


===== PAGE 82 / 266 =====

The mind is so tricky that it will not allow you to think 
like this. The moment this session is over, you will get up 
with a feeling as if nothing has happened. You have heard 
nothing. It is all gone, as water poured on a rock. This 
should not be. It should sink into your feeling. These 
discourses, this teaching, this academy is not a diversion 
from your daily duties or routine; it is a transmuting 
process of your very personality itself. It is intended to 
make you a new person altogether. When you return from 
this place, you will not be the same person that you were. 
You are a super person, a higher person, a slightly 
transcendent person, you may say. You have enlarged your 
being itself. 
Therefore, the Bhagavadgita gospel of duty hinges upon 
two factors: In the universal setup of things everybody has 
to participate in some way or the other according to their 
proclivity, due to the predominance of the gunas of Prakriti 
in one’s nature; and this participation should be based on 
the nature of one’s consciousness of one’s unity with the 
cosmos—dharma based on buddhi, karma based on jnana, 
in a state of equilibrium, or poised attitude of the mind. 
You will never be disturbed afterwards. Nothing can shake 
your will. Nobody can cause you sorrow, and nothing will 
cause you unhappiness. Is the body not maintaining a 
balance? It is always in the state of harmony. The world 
will, in a state of harmony, see that you are also placed in 
that harmony.  
Samatvaṁ yoga ucyate (Gita 2.48): Equilibrium is 
Yoga, harmony is Yoga, adjustment is Yoga, adaptability is 
Yoga, unity is Yoga, the blending of the subject and the 
82 
 


===== PAGE 83 / 266 =====

object in harmony is Yoga. In everything that you do, you 
must be in a state of harmony. You should not come in 
conflict with anybody—neither with nature nor with 
people. The moment you set up an atmosphere of conflict 
and you are not able to adjust your personality with the 
object, the adhibhuta, there you have failed in Yoga. Yogaḥ 
karmasu kauśalam (Gita 2.50) is another great dictum. 
Yoga is harmony, and it is also expertness in action. 
Expertness means the ability to see unity in everything that 
you do, and in every position in which you are placed. 
Here is a brief outline of the Karma Yoga principle of 
the Bhagavadgita. Therefore, Arjuna is asked to take a 
particular step under the prevailing circumstances, out of 
which he could not extricate himself. He is bound to do 
whatever is expected of him. Even if you think you will not 
do, you will actually be ruminating over that, and your ‘not 
doing’ is also a kind of action. Do not be attached to doing, 
and do not be attached to not doing. When you are doing 
some work, you may feel you are getting attached to it, and 
so you may desist from action under the impression that 
you are not going to be attached. But you are going to be 
attached to the other, negative aspect of it, namely, 
cessation from action. Your consciousness of action may be 
attachment, but your consciousness of non-action is also 
attachment. Mā karmaphalahetur bhūr mā te saṅgo ‘stv 
akarmaṇi (Gita 2.47): Do not cling to your duties and works 
as if it is your performance. It is not yours; it is a universal 
action. Also, do not cling to non-action. You are caught 
from both sides. Neither can you have the so-called 
83 
 


===== PAGE 84 / 266 =====

independent privilege of doing what you like, nor the 
option of not doing, under some circumstances.  
But how will you adjust yourself to this condition? This 
is exactly the difficulty. It was not easy for even Bishma to 
decide what was proper under the given conditions. Even 
Drona, the great master, slipped under conditions which 
were very critical. Arjuna was a lesser man. His mind was 
reeling in a state of confusion. 
No saint can be a saint all the time. There are a few 
moments when he comes down; he has difficulties and is 
unable to decide what is to be done. It is difficult to 
maintain God-consciousness all twenty-four hours of the 
day. Not even the greatest of saints can do that. Sometimes 
they act like human beings; but they rise up to God-
consciousness afterwards, of course. Incarnations also do 
not always behave in a universal, uniform manner. There 
are ups and downs in their behaviour, whatever the reason 
be. 
So with spiritual freedom, moksha, being the ultimate 
aim of existence, it becomes necessary on your part to be 
cautious. Yoga is not merely harmony, samattva, and it is 
not merely expertness in action. It is also caution. Vigilant 
is the Yogi. Apramattas tadā bhavati (Katha 2.3.2), says the 
Katha Upanishad. Heedfulness is the watchword of the 
Yoga student. If you are heedless and not able to catch the 
situation that is presented before you, you become 
mistaken in your attitude. Caution is the watchword. What 
is the caution? You must never forget that your particular 
behaviour and action that you perform is not disconnected 
from the consciousness of unity of purpose. This is the 
84 
 


===== PAGE 85 / 266 =====

caution. You have to be vigilant to see that your behaviour 
and action at any given moment of time is not out of 
context with the unity of purpose that is to be at the back of 
it. Otherwise, it will be a drab, desultory work which will 
please nobody—neither you, nor anyone else. 
So in this outlook of life you will find there is no such 
thing as secularity or spirituality isolated from one another. 
Nowadays people talk of secular existence, political 
existence, social existence, and spiritual existence. There is 
nothing of the kind. These are all unnecessary departments 
that we are creating psychologically in a single, seamless 
arrangement of life. That which is predominantly extrovert 
looks secular, but that which is predominantly extrovert is 
also not spiritual; nor is it an introverted action, or merely a 
political administration—all which, of course, are capable 
of being blended into a great Yoga of existence. A person 
can be a great statesman and politician, and also be a great 
Yogi. Lord Krishna himself is an example. He was a master 
statesman, master warrior, master Yogi, master politician, 
master sannyasin, master householder, and master 
incarnation of God. He blended together every aspect. 
Thus, you can be a very good servant in any walk of life, 
and there is no such thing as menial labour or better work, 
a white-collar job. They do not exist. Every work is 
dignified because of the fact that every work is connected to 
a spiritual connection of your life with the whole godly 
arrangement of things. So ‘spirituality’, ‘secularity’ and so 
on are words that have to be used in the proper sense. 
There is only one action, all divine in its being; and only 
one person acts—it is the supreme Purusha and Prakriti. 
85 
 


===== PAGE 86 / 266 =====

There is one purpose, the unity of existence, the blending of 
adhyatma, adhibhuta and adhidaiva in which you are 
involved. 
It is all joy. You seem to be in a kingdom of heaven even 
when you think of all these things. You are not living in 
hell. You are actually living in the heaven of God even now. 
The illusion of hell is only a temporary makeshift or a 
trickery of the mind, as in the end of the Mahabharta, 
Yudhishthira was made to see a kind of hell which was 
really not there; it was heaven itself. His perspective, his 
vision was distorted for some reason, and he began to see 
hell even in heaven. But the hell vanished, and heaven 
started shining before him. 
In this very world, at this very place, in this very 
context, you will see all trouble vanishing in one second as 
if you have woken up from sleep, from a phantasm of 
dream, and you see a new world altogether. The awakening 
of the spirit, which is the intention behind the teaching of 
the Bhagavadgita, is instantaneous action of rising from hell 
to heaven, from mortality to immortality, from finitude to 
infinitude. 
 
 
 
 
 
86 
 


===== PAGE 87 / 266 =====

Chapter 6 
SANKHYA—THE WISDOM OF COSMIC 
EXISTENCE 
From the point of view of the values of life based on our 
ordinary perception of things, it would appear that there is 
very little chance of the cosmical view entering into the 
normal modes of perception. We never look at things from 
a cosmical point of view. Everything seems to be at some 
place only, and perhaps for some time. Something is here, 
something is somewhere else, and there is apparently, from 
the perceptional point of view, no vital connection among 
things. We seem to be living in a world of values based on 
our sense perceptions which cannot embody anything that 
we can consider as universal or cosmic. There is nothing to 
prove in our daily life that cosmicality operates in us 
consciously. Every act of ours, every thought and every 
engagement or conscious relationship is sensorily bound, 
physically related and socially conditioned. Where is the 
cosmicality behind our daily life? 
The contrast that seems to be there between the fact of 
life—which is universal inclusiveness—and the way of life 
we are living through the sense organs is brought about in 
an interesting verse towards the end of the Second Chapter 
of the Gita: yā niśā sarvabhūtānāṁ tasyāṁ jāgarti 
saṁyamī, yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni sā niśā paśyato muneḥ 
(Gita 2.69). For us, this world of sense perception looks like 
bright daylight with every kind of clarity before it, and all 
things seem to be very well with us; but actually, we are in 
darkness in view of the fact that the truth of the universe is 
87 
 


===== PAGE 88 / 266 =====

not as it is presented to us through the sense organs. The 
daylight of the sense organs is the darkness of the spirit. 
The true spirit, which is universal, is sleeping, as it were, 
while the senses are awake and are active in the daylight of 
their activity.  
The cosmic vision sees our sensory world as a kind of 
darkness, while we, living in a sensory world, consider the 
cosmic world as darkness. The Universal is completely 
obliterated from our vision, as if it does not exist at all. It is 
pure darkness before us. But the world of sense perception 
is obliterated from the vision of the cosmic saint and sage, 
to whom this world is darkness. While we are awake in the 
world of the senses, the spirit is sleeping. When the spirit 
awakes to its own universal inclusiveness, the senses will 
sleep. Sri Krishna was born in the midnight of the sense 
organs. All the guards were sleeping. It is in that pitch 
darkness of the sense world that the light of the spirit 
awakens itself. 
So the daylight of clarity of perception, so-called, to us, 
is really a mass of ignorance that is before us—darkness to 
the spirit. And to us who rejoice in the perception of things 
through the sense organs, God Himself does not seem to 
exist. Who is conscious of the existence of God? He is non-
existent to the sense organs; and to God, the sense organs 
do not exist. This is a contrast, an interesting difference, a 
distinction drawn between spiritual universal existence and 
diversified sensory existence. Yā niśā sarvabhūtānāṁ 
tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī, yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni sā niśā 
paśyato muneḥ.  
88 
 


===== PAGE 89 / 266 =====

How would you, then, make yourself fit for the 
universal vision if you are rejoicing in the world of the 
sense organs? Another verse gives a little clue in this matter. 
Āpūryamāṇam acalapratiṣṭhaṁ samudram āpaḥ praviśanti 
yadvat, tadvat kāmā yaṁ praviśanti sarve sa śāntim āpnoti 
na kāmakāmī (Gita 2.70): A person filled with desires 
cannot have any vision of the Universal Spirit. If it could be 
possible, by way of intense austerity and restraint of sense 
organs, to withdraw the forces of the senses into your own 
self; if all the desires can merge into your universality as 
rivers merge in the ocean or as waves subside in the ocean; 
if the multifarious longings of the senses can melt down 
into the universal background of your own existence; if you 
are satisfied with what you are, and do not ask for what you 
do not have; if you do not go for things outside but are 
happy with your own self; if your loneliness is what you 
want and not the diversity of things outside—that is to say, 
if all your desires melt down in Pure Being, which is your 
essence—then the senses will not distract you in the way 
they do in ordinary life. You are basically universal in 
nature, and yet you perceive diversity in the world. There is 
contradiction between your daily perceptions and your 
spiritual longings.  
So here is a clue given in this verse of the Bhagavadgita. 
If you are stable like the majestic ocean which is never 
disturbed by any kind of tumult on its surface; if you can 
stand mightily like an elephant before the howling jackals 
of the senses; if you can be satisfied with what you are and 
not merely with what you have; if these desires which are 
wrongly oriented on account of the pressure of the sense 
89 
 


===== PAGE 90 / 266 =====

organs can revert back to your own self, then you will 
expand the dimension of your existence instead of looking 
like a finite individual. When so, desires enter into you and 
they do not proceed out in the direction of objects, and you 
attain peace: sa śāntim āpnoti. 
Peace cannot be had by possession of things. You 
cannot have peace of mind by contact with external objects 
or any kind of external relation. Peace is the outcome of 
unity of vision, integratedness of personality. The five 
koshas—Annamaya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya, 
Anandamaya—which are the finitising sheaths of your 
personality, should again melt down into the spirit from 
where they have arisen. Then you have peace. This is the 
greatest achievement that you can conceive. If this could be 
possible, you can be sure that you are established in the 
Absolute.  
Eṣā brāhmī sthitiḥ (Gita 2.72): This is the Absolute 
state. This is the state of Brahman. Which is the state of 
Brahman? It is where desires trouble you not, where you 
want nothing except your own Self because of the fact you 
are cosmically connected to creation as a whole. If you can 
establish your consciousness in this state even for a few 
minutes, you should consider yourself as blessed.  
Nai ‘nāṁ prāpya vimuhyati (Gita 2.72): Having attained 
this state, nobody is confounded afterwards. Once you have 
awakened, you will not be sleeping once again. Having 
established 
yourself 
in 
the 
consciousness 
of 
this 
absoluteness of your existence, you will never get confused. 
No doubt will arise in your mind.  
90 
 


===== PAGE 91 / 266 =====

Sthitvā ‘syām antakāle ‘pi brahmanirvāṇam ṛcchati 
(Gita 2.72): Even if at the time of passing from this world—
for a moment at least—you are established in this state, you 
will not be reborn into this world. If you can be blessed 
with this vision, this perception of the universe, even at the 
last moment when you are quitting this world, that would 
be blessedness. You will enter into the Absolute. The 
quantity or the length of life that you have wrongly lived in 
this world will not affect that quality of perception, even if 
it comes to you at the end of life. This is the great blessing, 
this is the great achievement, this is the greatest attainment, 
and this is the aim, the purpose, the whole of life. With this 
verse, the Second Chapter concludes. 
Arjuna, the student, hearing all this, was not able to 
grasp much of the profundities of this teaching because the 
Second Chapter of the Gita is packed with verses which 
become the seed of the exposition of the subsequent 
chapters. One or the other verse of the Second Chapter is 
the seed for the exposition of one or the other succeeding 
chapters. So it is a condensed teaching, also called Sankhya 
Yoga. It is a chapter of knowledge. But it was too much for 
Arjuna. “What is this that you are telling me, my Lord? You 
are emphasising on the one hand the wisdom aspect of life 
which makes out that I have to be established in the 
universal perception of things and withdraw myself from all 
kinds of sensory activity, and be what I am. On the other 
hand, you say ‘Why are you throwing down your bow and 
arrows like a coward, not doing your duty? Get up! Do your 
work.’ I cannot understand what you are speaking. On the 
one hand, it is universal vision, and on the other hand, 
91 
 


===== PAGE 92 / 266 =====

duty, do work. I am confused by what you say. Please 
clarify your point.” 
The answer to this question of Arjuna is the 
commencement of the Third Chapter of the Gita. “There 
are two ways of approach to things,” says the great Master, 
once again repeating, in more detail, what he said earlier. 
Sankhya and Yoga are the two ways of approach, but they 
are actually not different from each other. Whatever one 
can achieve through Sankhya, one can achieve through 
Yoga also. Contemplation and action, wisdom and work, 
are not differentiated vitally, basically. You cannot do 
anything without establishing that modus operandi of 
action on a perception which is Sankhya, or knowledge; 
and knowledge, which is Sankhya, or wisdom, is also meant 
to be applied in your daily relative existence. 
The Bhagavadgita teaching is an expert handling of the 
inner harmony that exists between God and creation, the 
universal and the particular, that which is Sankhya and that 
which is Yoga. What is the relationship between God and 
His creation? What is the relationship between subject and 
object? What is the relationship between consciousness and 
matter? What is the relationship between contemplation 
and action? All these questions amount to only one 
question, finally—namely, the absolute and the relative, the 
inner and the outer or, rather, the universal and the 
external. 
Sri Krishna’s point of view is that it is not possible to 
emphasise or stick to only one side of the matter. We are, as 
human beings, phenomenal as well as noumenal at the 
same time. We are immortal, and also seized with death. 
92 
 


===== PAGE 93 / 266 =====

Something in us will not die, and something in us dies. We 
speak of ourselves in two ways: We are bound to die one 
day, and we are imperishable. The imperishability of our 
nature has to be reconciled with our perishable nature. The 
phenomenal aspect of our personality is the relative aspect 
of it, which is bound to transform itself continuously in the 
process of time, and this process is called birth and death. 
But metaphysically, noumenally, we are imperishable.  
The fear of death itself is the proof of the immortality of 
our soul. If we are really death-bound, we will not fear 
death. If our essential nature is transiency, we will not be 
afraid of transiency. If poverty is the only thing that exists 
and there is no such thing as freedom from it, nobody will 
be afraid of poverty. There is something other than what we 
are; therefore, we are afraid of what we are. The 
perishability of our nature, which is the fear of death that 
may come tomorrow, while it frightens us on the one hand, 
also explains why we are frightened. The fright is due to the 
fact that we are really not going to die. Essentially we 
cannot die. Because of the fact that essentially we are not 
going to die, the fact of impending death on the other side 
frightens that aspect which is not going to die.  
The deathless immortality of ours is the reason why we 
are afraid of anything contrary to it, which is the 
phenomenal extinction of our personality. We are involved 
in space, time and causation, and materiality, which is the 
embodiment of our personality. Inasmuch as space, time 
and motion, and materiality and causation are in the 
process of time-bound evolution, then we, being involved 
in this process, also undergo this same transformation from 
93 
 


===== PAGE 94 / 266 =====

moment to moment. So phenomenally, we cannot escape 
death. That is to say, the phenomenal aspect of our 
personality cannot escape death. 
These five koshas mentioned—Annamaya, Pranamaya, 
Manomaya, Vijnanamaya, Anandamaya—this body, this 
social relation, this matter, this possession, this wealth, this 
whatever you have, they are all extraneous to your 
immortal essence, and therefore they are bound to leave 
you. Bereavement is the law of phenomenal existence. 
There is a verse towards the end of the Mahabharata which 
says that all accumulation will one day end in dispersion. 
All rising will end in fall. All accumulation will end in 
extinction. Life ends in death, and it is a fool who has 
occasions of joy and sorrow several times in a day. 
Sometimes you are elated, sometimes you are grief-stricken. 
There should be no occasion for you either to exult or to be 
grief-stricken, considering that these waves of joy and 
sorrow frequently dashing on you are caused by the process 
of time. Your duty is to follow dharma. 
So one aspect of your personality, which is phenomenal, 
talks in this strain, and the other aspect tells you that you 
are going to achieve infinite existence. God-realisation, 
moksha, is your aim. This is what your spirit will tell you 
again and again. Your aspirations are endless. Unending is 
the asking of the soul. Nothing in the world can satisfy you; 
not all the grain, not all the gold, not all the silver, not all 
the domain in the world can satisfy even one person. Not 
even one person can be satisfied by the wealth of the whole 
world. Such are the desires of man, like the flaming march 
of a conflagration in a forest. 
94 
 


===== PAGE 95 / 266 =====

As there are two aspects of a human being, there are 
also two approaches to the problems of life. One approach 
is Sankhya, another is Yoga, but they are not connected by 
an ‘and’. They are two phases, two wings of a single bird 
that is flying—simultaneously, indivisibly, as it were. Yoga 
is defined as action. Yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam (Gita 2.50): 
Expertness in action is Yoga. But what kind of action? 
What is meant by ‘action’? 
Here, in the beginning of the Third Chapter, a clue is 
given to us as to how action can bind or not bind. If the 
mind is not connected to the actions that you perform, you 
cannot call it real action. It will become like an automaton 
moving, a mechanical activity. If the body is moving and 
the mind is not thinking, it cannot be called real action. So 
while a person sits quiet without doing any action, we may 
imagine he is doing nothing; but he does something when 
the mind is conscious that he is not doing anything. If the 
mind is roaming over various questions of life or even 
entertaining desires as a daydream, but the sense organs are 
not active—neither you eat, nor you see, nor you smell, nor 
you talk, though you have a desire to eat and a desire to see, 
a desire to come in contact with people, but you are not 
allowing the desires to fulfil themselves by restraining the 
activity of the operative organs—this is real action. Even if 
you are physically doing nothing but are mentally doing 
something, you are an active person from the point of view 
of the psychology of your personality. But if your mind 
wants nothing, it has no desires of any kind, it contemplates 
not anything in this world but physically you are engaged 
in work, then that action cannot be called action. Mind, 
95 
 


===== PAGE 96 / 266 =====

intention, purposiveness, causation, impulse—these are the 
actions. So physical activity, whatever be its nature, cannot 
be regarded as action of any kind if the mind is detached 
from it.  
So there is a danger, especially in the case of a spiritual 
seeker, when one is prone to imagine that sitting quiet is a 
state of inaction, and freedom from the bondage of action. 
Action binds because of the thought involved in it. Action 
by itself does not bind, because consciousness is not 
connected with it. The binding factor is the charging of 
consciousness. When consciousness vitalises action, it 
becomes a specific action. When there is a devitalisation of 
the action process by the withdrawal of consciousness or 
mentality in it, it ceases to be meaningful action. Knowing 
this, one has to try to reconcile in one’s finite existence here 
the two aspects of one’s nature, the phenomenal and the 
noumenal. 
The verse of the Third Chapter says when God created 
this world and the individuals of various species, He 
ordained that there is a binding factor perpetually operating 
between the individuals and the cosmic process. 
Sahayajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā purovāca prajāpatiḥ, anena 
prasaviṣyadhvam eṣa vostv iṣṭakāmadhuk (Gita 3.10). At 
the beginning of creation, Prajapati, the Creator, willed, as 
it were, that all created evolutes are to be bound back to the 
universal perspective through some bond, which is known 
as sacrifice. Yajna is the clue to the way in which we have to 
conduct ourselves in this world. Life is considered as a 
sacrifice. I mentioned to you briefly that sacrifice is 
something like charity, the giving away of one’s own being 
96 
 


===== PAGE 97 / 266 =====

in some extent. That is, you share the finitude of your 
personality for the welfare and survival of other such 
finitudes with which you are all internally connected. By 
this process you diminish your own finitude and, 
simultaneously, you produce an alternate effect of 
increasing the dimension of your personality. You 
gradually become more and more non-finite by charity. 
‘Yajna’ is a word which is well known. Yajna, sacrifice, 
is generally understood in the popular sense to mean some 
offering in a sacred fire, somebody performing a yajna 
somewhere. When you are told this, you understand that 
some sacred fire is lit and oblations are offered for the 
satisfaction of the gods. This is one way to understand 
yajna because as a sacrifice, yajna may be external or 
internal. It can also be universal. This threefold aspect of 
yajna will be dealt with when we come to the Eighteenth 
Chapter of the Gita. 
So, externally yajna would mean offering oblations in a 
sacred fire. This yajna, which is offered externally by 
ritualistic chanting of mantras, etc., is also one kind of 
sacrifice. You offer something in the sacred fire for the 
satisfaction of a divinity as you have observed priests, 
pundits offering oblations. The yajamana, or the conductor 
of the sacrifice, is asked to repeat the word ‘namama’. 
Indraya svaha indraya idam namama: May this be to the 
satisfaction of Indra, not for me. Namama: I am not doing 
this yajna for my satisfaction. It is for the satisfaction of the 
god. Who is this god? These Indras, Varunas, Angis, etc., in 
the Veda mantras are actually the adhidaivas. The 
adhyatma is the performer of the sacrifice, the adhidaiva is 
97 
 


===== PAGE 98 / 266 =====

the deity to whom the offer is made for his satisfaction. So 
even in external sacrifice, yajna is very valuable, provided it 
is done with a pure spirit of understanding of the offering, 
the adhidaiva, and the adhyatma yajamana. The kunda, the 
actual altar, is the adhibhuta preparation. The sacred altar 
that is prepared for the performance of this sacrifice, ritual 
performance or yajna, is part of the adhibhuta-prapancha 
because it is made of bricks, mortar, etc. On the basis of this 
adhibhuta preparation of the altar, the adhyatma, which is 
the individual concerned, offers a symbolic gift, as it were, 
to that invisible, internal connecting link of divinity, the 
adhidaiva. So you understand to some extent the meaning 
of these external homas, yajnas, sacrifices, etc. 
This intricate process of a yajna is not merely offering 
something mechanically for no purpose, but is an inwardly 
oriented vital action of the inward relationship between the 
adhyatma, the adhibuta and adhidaiva. So even in an 
external ritualistic homa or yajna, a universal setup is 
produced by the contemplation of the yajnamana, or the 
performer. In a passage of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, 
the question is raised by a member of the audience in the 
court of Janaka who addresses Yajnavalkya: “Any offering 
that is made is perishable. All actions lead to results which 
will cease one day or the other. So all sacrifice ends in a 
perishable result. How would the performer of sacrifice 
attain immortality through sacrifice? Answer this question, 
Yajnavalkya.” 
Yajnavalkya says, “What you say is correct because the 
offering is a limited, finite substance. It may be some charu, 
some ghee, or some preparation like porridge; it is a 
98 
 


===== PAGE 99 / 266 =====

perishable unit indeed. The altar is also a limited substance. 
Where is the unlimitedness there? How would heavenly 
enjoyment or immortality accrue to the performer if 
perishable objects are offered at a perishable altar? The 
perishable nature vanishes and the impershability implied 
in the performance of the yajna manifests itself, provided 
the yajnamana at the same time contemplates the divinity 
that is between the adhyatma and the adhibhuta. If the 
yajna or action, or whatever it is, is performed minus the 
consciousness of the adhidaiva, then it becomes a 
perishable deed.”  
So yajna, even done ritualistically, is a great thing, and 
you can offer material substance, as is done usually in 
sacrifices, as symbols of your gesture of offering to the 
divinity; or yajnas can be performed only mentally. 
Agastya, as is told to us in the Mahabharata, seems to have 
performed a great yajna without any material whatsoever—
no alter, no vessels, no ghee, no charu, no porridge, no 
yajamana, no priest, nothing was there. He was sitting 
there contemplating the whole process, and it produced the 
result. Mental action is more powerful than physical action, 
but physical action can also assume meaning if the mind is 
connected with it. So yajnas can be outward or inward, and 
in the Fourth Chapter it will be mentioned how varieties of 
yajnas are possible—dravya yajna, yoga yajna, and so on. 
The point is that this yajna principle which was 
apparently instituted by God Himself at the time of 
creation, as is mentioned in this verse, implies that you are 
bound by a bond of sacrifice to the universal Whole right 
from the birth of your personality. That is, you are duty-
99 
 


===== PAGE 100 / 266 =====

bound. This is an emphasis further laid on what is already 
said in the Second Chapter. You cannot be free from the 
obligation of duty because the gods sustain you, and you 
are supposed to be grateful to them. The adhidaiva is 
sustaining the adhibhuta and the adhyatma connection. If 
the divinity adhidaiva surya prapancha, or the power of the 
solar existence in the sky—which is controlling the process 
of visual perception—is not to act, you will not see anything 
in the world. The world is not jumping into the eyes; the 
eyes also do not contact the objects outside. Both are 
physical in their nature, but there is conscious perception 
taking place when we open our eyes and see things. This 
conscious perception is made possible by the action of a 
principle between the object outside and our own sensory 
organs. In the case of vision, it is supposed to be surya. The 
solar existence is the reason behind our vision, and many 
other divinities are connected with other organs.  
So whoever consumes things for himself, without being 
grateful to the gods who are responsible for his very 
existence, is a thief. The benefits that accrue to you in this 
world are the gifts of the gods. It will be so if you appreciate 
that the adhidaiva is controlling you, even when you 
breathe. The connection between you and the world, which 
is what you call life in this world, is actually caused by the 
action of something which is neither you nor the world 
outside. Should you not be grateful for that? Gratitude is 
the greatest virtue. If you are not even conscious of the gifts 
that you receive from the higher sources and imagine that 
you are the doer and the enjoyer, while you are neither the 
doer nor the enjoyer because it is the adhidaiva that is 
100 
 


===== PAGE 101 / 266 =====

actually pushing you and making you an instrument of 
action in the world, you are considered as a grabber, as a 
thief. 
This is a little commentary on the principle of action in 
this world. Act you must; work is your duty. It is so because 
of the fact you are involved phenomenally in this body, in 
space, time and causation. You cannot wrench yourself 
from the relativity in which you are involved just because of 
the fact that Universality is your existence.  
So the Bhagavadgita brings about a beautiful blend 
between the relative and the Absolute. It does not go to the 
extreme of emphasising only the earthly existence of 
political and social relations, nor does it sever the 
relationship of your relative existence with the cosmic 
existence. God and man walk together in the principle of 
the Bhagavadgita. They shake hands, as it were, as friends. 
Krishna and Arjuna are considered as eternal comrades. 
The God of the universe and the relativity of the individual 
are not to be segregated. Nara and Narayana are the 
symbols divinely portrayed of man and God. The 
relationship between man and God, the world and the 
cosmic, the relative and the Absolute, is the relationship 
between Arjuna and Krishna. Two birds perched on the 
same tree, living together, one eating not the fruit of the 
tree and the other engaged in the enjoyment of the fruit, is 
another analogy that we have in the Rigveda mantra and 
also in the Upanishads, the two birds being God and man.  
This body, this world, this creation, is itself the tree on 
which two birds are perching. One bird is God; the other 
bird is myself, yourself. You are engaged in eating the fruit 
101 
 


===== PAGE 102 / 266 =====

in this world, which is so delicious, and are not even 
conscious of the other bird sitting near you, unconcerned 
and merely gazing. Where is the freedom? This is perhaps 
the fruit which you should not eat. What you require is the 
vision of that which is sitting quietly inside you, the 
unconcerned spectator of the universe. This spectator of the 
universe is God, Ishvara, who is your friend, Narayana. He 
sits quiet in the chariot of Arjuna, doing nothing. Arjuna is 
very busy every moment. The intense activity of Arjuna and 
the so-called calm, quiet seatedness of Krishna are great 
contradictions indeed. The Bhagavadgita wants to bring a 
blend between these. “Act! Do not be a coward. Rush 
forward!” says the one who does nothing Himself. And the 
last verse of the Bhagavadgita will also be a further 
exposition of the necessity of the blend of Krishna and 
Arjuna, Narayana and Nara, God and man, the Absolute 
and the relative. 
Sankhya and Yoga therefore, while they appear to be 
two ways of approach to things, are two ways of a single 
approach only, in the end. The singleness of this approach 
arises from the fact that we are simultaneously phenomenal 
and noumenal. We are not today phenomenal and 
tomorrow noumenal. We are in God and in this world—
you may say, in heaven and in hell—at the same time. So it 
is necessary for us to be cautious in the sense that we are 
able to be an expert manager of our own person in this 
world of an apparent division or a contradiction between 
the universal and the particular. Expertness in this 
performance is necessary, cosmically as well as individually; 
else, there will be a rift in our personality. We will be a 
102 
 


===== PAGE 103 / 266 =====

psychological derelict. There will be non-alignment of our 
inner psyche. 
There is a gradational necessity to integrate the 
personality from the lowest of our levels to the highest. 
Physically also we must be integrated; otherwise, we will be 
sick bodies. The maintenance of the body in its anabolic 
and catabolic processes should be a blend of action taking 
place every day. Neither not eating nor eating too much; 
neither sleeping too much nor not sleeping at all, etc., will 
be told to you later on. So is the case with your senses. 
Neither indulge them nor starve them. So is the case with 
the mind. It has two desires—to ask for the endlessness of 
things and to satisfy its own craving through the desire.  
A very careful handling of the situation is necessary, as 
it was necessary for Arjuna to handle the Mahabharata 
context with the guidance of Krishna that was coming to 
him perpetually. Thus, you have to be healthy in body, 
restrained in the sense organs, calm and quiet in your 
mind, logical in your intellect, and happy within. This is 
how you can integrate your personality. Then there should 
be integration of society. You should not create conflict 
between yourself and people outside. The yamas of 
Patanjali’s Yoga tell you that you should be in harmony 
with society. So integration starts with your own 
personality first, and then it extends to society—you are a 
friend of your own self and a friend of everybody else also. 
Then you become a friend of nature and the Cosmic Being. 
This is how the apparent conflict between the objective side 
and the subjective side can be brought together into a state 
of harmony. 
103 
 


===== PAGE 104 / 266 =====

Sankhya is the knowledge of cosmic existence; Yoga is 
the art of performance of duty in this world. They are not 
two different things. You have to be conscious of your 
cosmic existence and, at the same time, perform duty in 
this world as a phenomenally bound individual. You have 
to be always with Krishna, though you yourself are an 
Arjuna only.  
These few verses at the commencement of the Third 
Chapter highlighting work on the basis of the relationship 
between Sankhya and Yoga and yajna mention what our 
duty is. Therefore, duty of the human being, in the context 
of the teaching of the Bhagavadgita, is a divine living from 
moment to moment. We are not living like beasts, animals. 
We are not instinct driven, as the cattle in the forest. We 
are logically conscious of the pros and cons of our actions. 
The past determines the present, and the present 
determines the future to some extent in our case because of 
the connection of our consciousness with the past, present 
and future. It is only at the human level that we are able to 
make decisions and be logical in our approach. When we 
approach this human level, attain this state of humanity, we 
suddenly become conscious of the higher and the lower at 
the same time. The animals, the plants and the trees and the 
stones and the atom are not supposed to be conscious of 
what is beyond them. They are limited to their own 
existence, bound by instinct, and there is no reason 
operating in them; they have only instinct. The lower mind 
operates, but not the logical reason. The logical reason, the 
pure rationality, manifests itself only in the human being—
104 
 


===== PAGE 105 / 266 =====

the pure reason, as we call it, the higher buddhi, which tells 
us where our limit is, and what is beyond. 
We have a sense of duty in this world, and also a 
longing for that which is not in this world. These two 
aspects operate in us continuously. We always long for 
something that is more than this world, and yet we are 
bound to this world, of which we are very conscious. Our 
consciousness of our being in this world as an individual 
bound to duty and obligation to people goes simultaneously 
with our consciousness of a longing that is above this 
world. Therefore, we are transcendent and immanent 
socially, personally, in every way, at the same time. 
The Bhagavadgita gospel is a guide for us in every walk 
of life, in every crucial moment, to solve every kind of 
problem because here, in this gospel of the Gita, we have a 
presentation before us of the total setup of things, bringing 
together the visible and the invisible, the world and the 
eternal, time and timelessness, that which is and that which 
ought to be. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105 
 


===== PAGE 106 / 266 =====

Chapter 7 
THE ENTRY OF THE ABSOLUTE INTO THE 
RELATIVE 
The involvement of everyone in the principle of 
sacrifice is stated briefly when the Gita tells us: sahayajñāḥ 
prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā purovāca prajāpatiḥ, anena prasaviṣyadhvam 
eṣa vostv iṣṭakāmadhuk (Gita 3.10). When Prajapati, the 
Creator, manifested this universe and projected individuals 
like us, he also ordained, at the same time, that the life of an 
individual is inextricably involved in the process of the 
whole of creation through the bond of the principle of 
sacrifice. 
We live on account of the result that spontaneously 
follows from the act of the sacrifice that we perform in this 
world. We will wither away into airy nothing and will not 
be able to even survive for three days if some sort of 
sacrifice is not done by way of our participation in the work 
of cosmic creation. Our interconnection with all things in 
the world is the reason why we require to be conscious 
always of this need to participate by way of sacrifice. We are 
not totally independent individuals. Our independence is 
only a grant, a special permit issued to us, as it were, for the 
time being, like the permission given to a cow to move 
freely within the distance of the rope with which it is tied. If 
a cow is tied to a peg with a long rope, to the extent of the 
length of the rope there is freedom for the cow to roam 
about wherever it wants, and it feels totally independent. It 
may feel a great freedom to move anywhere, but only to the 
extent of the length of the rope. The moment it reaches the 
106 
 


===== PAGE 107 / 266 =====

terminus of the rope, it is pulled back and it cannot go 
further. So our individuality, which appears to be a kind of 
freedom that we enjoy in our own so-called personality, is 
limited by the necessity to participate in a cosmic purpose, 
and we are free only to the extent our sacrifice is complete 
as ordained. 
Inasmuch as the freedom of individuality is not real 
finally, as is apparent in the context of our assertion of 
personality through egoism, the point of sacrifice assumes 
great importance, and we seem to be living more for things 
beyond ourselves than for our own selves. The need that 
you feel for social service, for cooperation with people 
outside, to work for the betterment of anyone in the 
world—this need that you feel as an urge from inside you is 
not a whim or fancy; it is an upsurge of a necessity that is 
emanating from the root of your personality itself. Your 
very soul calls for this activity on your part, saying inwardly 
in its own voice that you cannot exist by yourself. You exist 
also for something more than yourself.  
The existence that you enjoy in this world is not 
conditioned by external factors, as you imagine that the 
service that you do to people is a service that you do to 
somebody other than you. It is not so. The service that you 
render to people, to humanity, is not something that you do 
for the good of that which is outside you, but that which is 
above you. You have to make a distinction between that 
which is above you and that which is outside you. The 
social context it is that is compelling you to do service in 
this world. Society, which is a big subject of sociological 
science, is not merely a group of people. A million people 
107 
 


===== PAGE 108 / 266 =====

sitting together do not constitute society because they will 
be like bricks thrown higgledy-piggledy somewhere, and 
the bricks do not constitute an edifice. Society is a 
conceptual organisational feature that transcends the 
multitude of parts, which are the individuals. The 
organisational feature that is involved in what you call 
society is the transcendent feature which is immanent in all 
individuals so that every individual feels a sense of 
belonging to the society and, at the same time, no 
individual can be regarded as the whole of society because 
there is a transcendent element in the very consciousness of 
society. It is a society of principle, and not a multitude of 
people.  
So your service, your sense of belonging, your 
compulsion to act for the welfare of people is actually not 
motivated by your consciousness of the otherness of people, 
which is an empirical concept that you are wrongly 
introducing into yourself, but a transcendent aspect—that 
is, a Selfhood, an Atman, a consciousness, a reality which is 
above your personality, and above the personality of 
everybody else also, so that there is a little bit of divinity, a 
consciousness of a godhood involved even in social service. 
Otherwise, who will do work merely for the sake of other 
people? The very consciousness of otherness frees you from 
having any interest in people. You will not like to have love 
for anything that is other than you; but still, you love 
something. Why do you love? It is not because of the 
otherness of the object, because if it is ‘other’, the matter is 
closed. You have already severed yourself from the other 
man. The very word ‘other’ is anathema because it cuts you 
108 
 


===== PAGE 109 / 266 =====

off from your vital connection with that thing which you 
call the other.  
But there is something else in you that you miss in 
ordinary sense perception. The love that you feel for 
anything in the world is a call that comes from that which is 
between you and the other thing—the adhidaiva 
prapancha. Again I bring that point to you. There is an 
adhyatma, adhibhuta and adhidaiva. The thing that you 
love is adhibhuta. The persons, the society, or whatever you 
call it is the adhibhuta, as it were, but only as it were—not 
really—because your connection with the adhibhuta 
prapancha, the world as a whole, nature, society, whatever 
it is, is invalidated immediately if the adhidaiva is not there 
connecting you and transcending you both. The adhidaiva 
transcends you as well as the object outside. That inclusive 
personality of a transcendent consciousness, adhidaiva, is 
the reason why you are impelled to have any interest in 
things in this world. That is why you feel like doing some 
work. The adhidaiva compels you because it is in that 
which you want to work for, and in you also, which is the 
cause of the impulsion. This is a big philosophical cosmic 
significance that is involved in this little injunction of 
Prajapati: sahayajñāḥ prajāḥ sṛṣṭvā purovāca prajāpatiḥ, 
anena prasaviṣyadhvam eṣa vostv iṣṭakāmadhuk. 
Now, the Third Chapter of the Bhagavadgita is long, 
and I am briefly mentioning the essence of it: that you have 
to live in this world like a Super-man, but a Super-man in 
the sense that you are motivated by the consciousness of the 
adhidaiva only. You are a transcendent person always; you 
are not one in the multitude. A person who is rooted in the 
109 
 


===== PAGE 110 / 266 =====

adhidaiva consciousness does not belong to himself. You 
are not yourself. You are not another. What are you, then? 
The Super-man’s character is a transcendent element which 
intervenes in between the so-called yourself and the other 
thing, which apparently conditions you as society.  
A Super-man is not a man in the ordinary sense. He is 
not a human being at all. You should not call him a man. 
‘Super-person’, or some such thing with a capital, may be 
the designation applied to this principle of self-
transcendence, for want of better words in language. A 
Super-person is not a person, because that person has risen 
above himself in the consciousness of that which is between 
himself and the other, so that he is ranging in the world as a 
master, and not as a slave or a servant.  
When you become a Super-person, you do not belong 
to yourself. You have already sacrificed your personality for 
the sake of that thing which is above you, and you have 
sacrificed yourself for the other thing also; both you and the 
other thing are transcended by this interconnection, 
namely, the adhidaiva. 
The whole world runs, therefore, by the operation of 
God. It is not working because of its own self. Neither 
nature 
nor 
society 
nor 
yourself 
are 
independent 
individuals. Nothing works independent of that universal 
interconnecting link, which is God operating through all 
His media of interconnection. 
There are endless connections of this type. The 
relationship of adhyatma and adhibhuta is involved in an 
infinite variety of degrees of ascent and descent. This 
imperative of the presence of a consciousness between 
110 
 


===== PAGE 111 / 266 =====

adhyatma and adhibhuta in various degrees is the reason 
why you sometimes feel there are many gods. Sometimes 
the question arises: Are there many gods, or only one God? 
There is only one God, the Absolute, but inasmuch as it 
manifests itself as an interconnecting link between subject 
and object through millions of degrees of ascent and 
descent, it looks as there are millions of gods. It is as if there 
are millions of governments merely because there are 
millions of officials in a centrality of administration. There 
is only one central government which connects everyone 
together into a cohesive whole, though it works through 
degrees of provincial, district and many other operations 
through individuals who look like individuals. They are 
actually connected to the Centre, and therefore look like 
little gods. Each official is a government in itself, yet it is 
simply a modicum, a miniature degree of a centrality of 
operation which has many degrees below it, and also many 
degrees above it. So if you can say that many officials in the 
government are many governments, then you can say there 
are many gods also. But if you say they are not 
governments, then gods also do not exist. It depends upon 
your viewpoint. 
These degrees of the manifestation of reality through 
the relationship of subjects and objects, endless in number, 
ascending and descending in series, is the structure of the 
cosmos; and a Super-person, Super-man, is one who is 
conscious of this fact of his involvement in a transcendent 
degree, whatever that degree be. Perhaps even Super-men 
have degrees. There are various degrees of the reality 
involved in Super-people also. It does not mean what we 
111 
 


===== PAGE 112 / 266 =====

call all Super-men are equal and uniform in power and 
knowledge everywhere. All the avataras of God, as they are 
called, incarnations, are also manifestations of Super-men, 
you may say, but there are degrees. One has a lesser 
percentage of divinity, one has a higher percentage of 
divinity in the hierarchy of power that is granted by the 
Supreme Centre that is the Absolute.  
Hence, a person who is a Super-person, a Super-
individual, a God-man, you may call him, lives freely in this 
world. He is free because he is controlled, operated by, 
supported by the Central Power. But if you assert your 
individuality and cut yourself off from that link which is 
connecting you to everything in the world, you are done 
for. Then you will suffer in this world. You will say that 
nobody helps you, that you have nothing. Actually, you 
have everything with you. The Cosmic Purpose, which is all 
abundance and power, manifests itself every moment of 
time, which is called the avatara, a subject which will come 
in the Fourth Chapter of the Gita. 
When you live in this world as a master, your behaviour 
with people should be like a good psychologist and a very 
good teacher. The Bhagavadgita is also a very good 
psychologist. Your ‘Super-hood’, your Super-personality 
should not parade itself as a kind of superior boss over 
people in the world. Na buddhibhedaṁ janayed ajñānāṁ 
karmasaṁginām (Gita 3.26). People who are inferior to you 
in knowledge and comprehension should not be interfered 
with. You should not say, “You are on the wrong path, you 
are a fool, your knowledge is inadequate, you don’t 
understand anything.” A psychologist or schoolteacher 
112 
 


===== PAGE 113 / 266 =====

does not talk like that. He understands the inadequacy of 
comprehension of the student, and from the level the 
student is, the teacher slowly raises the consciousness of the 
student.  
A good teacher is also a good psychologist. The teacher 
descends from his high pedestal to the level of a particular 
student and communes himself with the mentality, feeling 
and difficulty of the student, as a good doctor descends into 
the condition of a patient who is suffering. Not only does 
he understand his physical suffering, but also his mind and 
feelings, and the causes of his illness which may be 
psychological, or anything. So he is a parent. A good doctor 
or teacher is a father and mother, and a Super-man is also a 
father and mother, as the Lord will tell you in his message.  
Na buddhibhedaṁ janayed: Do not go on telling, “You 
are wrong.” Nobody is wrong. They are all in one category, 
one degree, and you are also in one condition. They are like 
a baby crawling, and why should you condemn that 
crawling baby as if you are now superior to it? Everybody is 
on a level of evolution, and every level of evolution is a 
compulsory stage; therefore, nobody is superior, nobody is 
inferior, and no work is bad, no work is good. There is 
dignity in every work, and every relationship is divine in its 
meaning. 
Prakṛteḥ 
kriyamāṇāni 
guṇaiḥ 
karmāṇi 
sarvaśaḥ, 
ahaṁkāravimūḍhātmā kartāham iti manyate (Gita 3.27). 
Ignorant people become ignorant of the fact that Prakriti’s 
gunas operate among Prakriti’s gunas in the form of objects 
outside. You are involved in the perception of the world 
and do not understand what is actually taking place when 
113 
 


===== PAGE 114 / 266 =====

you perceive the world. When you perceive the world, 
when you become conscious of the object outside, what the 
Gita is telling you is that Prakriti is impinging on Prakriti.  
Now, the cosmological evolutionary theory, which I 
mentioned to you sometime back, the entire Purusha-
Prakriti arrangement, would have enlightened you to the 
fact that the three gunas—sattva, rajas and tamas—are the 
constituents of your own individuality also. You are made 
up of only these gunas in all your sheaths—Annamaya, 
Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya, Ananadamaya. The 
very same gunas are also the constituents of objects outside. 
The only thing is that in your case there is a mind, there is 
an intellect, there is a prana and other things involved in 
this kosha arrangement, whereas in the object, which is the 
adhibhuta prapancha, there is a predominance of tamas. 
There is predominance of tamas in the objective world, 
predominance of rajas in the subjective individuality, and 
predominance of sattva in the adhidaiva, which is the 
divinity.  
Because of the fact of everything being constituted only 
of the three gunas of Prakriti, you will be able to appreciate 
what actually happens when you come in contact with an 
object of perception through the sense organs. The gunas of 
Prakriti, which are the constituents of your sense organs 
and even the mind, collide, as it were, and come in contact 
with the very same properties present in a different 
percentage of combination and permutation in the form of 
objects. It is, as it were, one wave clashing against another 
wave in the very same ocean in all acts of perception. 
114 
 


===== PAGE 115 / 266 =====

So, who is seeing the world? “I am seeing the world”—
don’t say that. Prakriti is seeing itself. Prakṛteḥ 
kriyamāṇāni: All actions are done by Prakriti only. But not 
knowing this, ahaṁkāravimūḍhātmā: A person is working 
through the ego only, centring himself in the consciousness 
of himself excessively. Kartāham iti manyate: I am doing. 
Neither are you doing anything, nor are you perceiving 
anything. Your consciousness of being an agent in action is 
due to the ego that is predominant in you, and your feeling 
that you are perceiving an external world is due to the 
operation of the gunas of Prakriti, both subjectively and 
objectively. 
Therefore, caution is the watchword of a spiritual 
seeker. It is difficult to live in this world which is so 
complicated before you. The complication arises on 
account of your not knowing how you are placed in this 
world. In the beginning itself I told you, you cannot do 
anything worthwhile in this world unless you know your 
placement in the context of the world—where you are 
standing, where you are sitting, what is around you. If you 
know the context and the environment around you, you 
will also know what to do in that context. For that purpose 
it is that I have given you a large detail of the cosmic 
evolutionary process, and you know where you are 
standing. Hence, you will never assert your ego. You will 
not feel that you are existing at all. You will melt into the 
menstruum of the world outside. You will be a well-wisher 
of everybody, a friend of all—a friend, philosopher and 
guide, a master. 
115 
 


===== PAGE 116 / 266 =====

Atha kena prayuktoyaṁ pāpaṁ carati pūruṣaḥ (Gita 
3.36). Arjuna asks a question: “Wonderful is this teaching, 
Master, but why is it that we are not able to live like this? 
We commit sins, as it were, errors every day. We commit 
blunders. Knowing this, what is the matter?” 
Sri Krishna gives a reply. Kāma eṣa krodha eṣa 
rajoguṇasamudbhavaḥ, mahāśano mahāpāpmā viddhy 
enam iha vairiṇam (Gita 3.37): The predominance of rajas 
in your personality engenders the work of kama and 
krodha, desire and anger. Somehow or other, with this 
knowledge, you also simultaneously seem to have inside 
you the roots and the seeds of potential longing and anger. 
You love God, but you also love Mammon at the same time. 
You love the objects of the senses together with your love 
for being a God-man and a Super-man. There is a clash 
between your noble aspirations and your pull of the sense 
organs—a very difficult situation.  
Arjuna says, “I understand what you say.” Insatiable is 
this fire of longing for objects of sense. It will consume you. 
The more you pamper it, the more it asks. Fire cannot be 
satisfied by any amount of fuel. It asks for more and more 
fuel so that it may enlarge itself and burn everything. Desire 
wants to consume you completely so that you may not be 
here at all. And if your desire is obstructed by an event, you 
are angry. You want to destroy that cause which is 
apparently obstructing the fulfilment of your desire. So 
anger is only another form of longing. It is the longing to 
perpetuate your longing which, obstructed, manifests itself 
as the obverse of what you call a desire, and you call it 
anger. Actually, this one impulse that is rising in you on 
116 
 


===== PAGE 117 / 266 =====

one side looks like longing, desire, passion, lust; on the 
other side it looks like irascibility and anger.  
Arjuna knows what this means. “Now, what is the use 
of hearing all these things? How am I to overcome this 
wondrous malady, kama and krodha, if they are 
predominantly present in individuals as rajasic properties 
working havoc in everyone? How would we live this cosmic 
life which you have so gloriously described?” 
The method of meditation is very briefly discussed 
towards the end of the Third Chapter in two verses, but it is 
the essence of the whole matter: it is possible to overcome 
longing, desire for objects of sense, only by intense 
meditation through a gradational process. This is also 
described in detail in the Sixth Chapter. Indriyāṇi parāṇy 
āhur indriyebhyaḥ paraṁ manaḥ, manasas tu parā buddhir 
yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ (Gita 3.42); evaṁ buddheḥ 
paraṁ buddhvā saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā, jahi śatruṁ 
mahābāho kāmarūpaṁ durāsadam (Gita 3.43). This is a 
brief statement of a longer, more detailed enunciation of 
the very same thing in the Katha Upanishad. Indriyas, sense 
organs, are very powerful. Impetuous are the sense organs. 
Like a wild tornado, they will dash the ship of your life.  
But the mind is superior to the sense organs. The mind 
has the capacity to know that the indriyas, or the senses, are 
impetuous in their nature. This is the superiority of the 
mind. The senses do not know that they are impetuous. 
They are just impetuous. They are wild movement. This 
wild movement of the senses is identical with the senses 
themselves. They cannot know that they are wild. If you are 
angry, you do not know that you are angry. Anger 
117 
 


===== PAGE 118 / 266 =====

consumes you to such an extent that an angry person does 
not know that he is angry. If you know that you are angry, 
it will not be real anger. So the mind has the capacity to 
subdue the impetuosity of the senses by a little bit of 
deliberation. The mind knows that the senses have to be 
restrained, but the mind cannot easily take a decision. The 
mind has an indeterminate perceptional capacity of 
knowing the difficulty produced by the sense organs, but 
the decision has to be taken: this must be done. The senses 
have to be subdued. 
It is buddhi, reason, that tells you of the higher 
aspirations that are embedded in you. The ambassador of 
God, as it were, is working through the reason of your 
personality. An ambassador is a link between two 
governments. He communicates the messages of his 
government to the other government that he is connected 
with. He brings about a rapprochement and a kind of 
harmonious relationship between two governments. That is 
the reason why embassies are established in the world. 
Reason is a kind of ambassador between God and the world 
of creation. Because of the position it occupies as an 
ambassador of God, the reason also tells you that you are 
above this world and cannot be satisfied with anything in 
this world. The reason says it is incumbent on you to 
control the sense organs so that you may become a Super-
person and not be under the subjection of the sense organs. 
But it is also situated in a world of sensation and mentation. 
It is a relationship with two governments, as I mentioned to 
you—the world of senses and the world of divinity. So 
while the mind is conscious of the impetuosity of the sense 
118 
 


===== PAGE 119 / 266 =====

organs, the reason gives you the additional strength to 
actually work on this consciousness of it being necessary to 
control the sense organs, because while it is aware of the 
modus operandi that you have used in the control of the 
sense organs, it also has the power descending on it from 
the higher order of things. With the power of divinity 
which is scintillating in it, it can charge upon the sense 
organs through the mind and bring their strength down to 
a mellowed condition. 
Yo buddheḥ paratas tu saḥ: There is something above 
the intellect or the reason, which is the central universality 
of power. And because of it being possible for you to 
connect your reason with the universal centrality, you will 
be able to succeed in your spiritual practice. If reason is 
absent, you will be like an animal with a merely instinctive 
mind controlled by the sense organs. Yo buddheḥ paratas 
tu saḥ: The Atma-shakti, which is above the buddhi, or the 
intellect, should guide you here. You will be asking, “How it 
is done? The Atman-consciousness is not in me, my 
intellect is oscillating, my mind is very indecisive, and my 
senses are very powerful. What is the process?” 
The details will be told to you in the Sixth Chapter. You 
have to find some time to think over these issues. It is a 
serious matter that is before you. Every day in your life you 
have to be seated alone for some time, and then close your 
eyes. “What is it that I have gathered, after all?” Then 
collect your thoughts. Stop the breathing for a second and 
work upon this concept of your involvement in the whole 
cosmos, in this sacrificial participation of your personality 
in the context of God’s creation, as mentioned—in your not 
119 
 


===== PAGE 120 / 266 =====

being a person but a Super-person, really speaking. “I am 
foolhardy to think that I am an individual by myself. Every 
moment of time I am controlled by something which is 
above me. My breath is moving, my limbs are operating, 
my mind is thinking and I am living in this world because 
of the operation of something which is not me, but which is 
above me. I am something more than what I am.”  
Let this consciousness be driven into you. You are 
something much more than what you look like, much more 
than what you are, and much more than what you see with 
your eyes outside in the world. You are not what you are, 
and you are not what you see with the eyes. You are 
something above both what you see and what you are. Let 
this be the object of your meditation. 
Evaṁ buddheḥ paraṁ buddhvā: Thus, knowing that 
which is above your reason; saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā: 
restraining yourself by yourself, restraining your lower self 
by the higher self of the adhidaiva consciousness, 
restraining your so-called ego individuality from its usual 
sensory operations by the action upon it by the adhidaiva, 
which 
you 
are 
really. 
This 
is 
the 
meaning 
of 
saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā: restraining yourself by 
yourself. There are two yourselves: the lower yourself and 
the higher yourself. The lower yourself is what you look 
like, this Mr., this Mrs. But the higher yourself is the 
adhidaiva, which is really what you are, and not what you 
appear to be. Jahi śatruṁ: this enemy which is impeding 
your progress, which is desire and anger. Kāmarūpaṁ: Oh 
powerful hero, destroy this desire. Who is the evil in this 
world? If there is evil at all, where is this evil? There is no 
120 
 


===== PAGE 121 / 266 =====

other evil in this world. “Thus, compose yourself and be 
blessed, O Arjuna,” says Bhagavan Sri Krishna towards the 
end of this Third Chapter. 
The more you study, the more you hear, the more 
difficulties will arise in the mind. Still you have doubts: “All 
that you have said is wonderful. We will try our best to do 
this, but we are weaklings. We do not know if we will really 
succeed in achieving this goal in this life.” Doubts are our 
traitors, says the poet. If there is a traitor in this world, 
doubt is the traitor. You always condemn yourself and say, 
“I am useless. I am not for it.” Who told you that you are 
not for it? How does this idea that you are unfit arise in 
your mind? Perhaps you are fit. Why are you saying you 
have difficulties? You have studied well, everything is clear 
to you, all things are ready at your fingertips. You will stand 
first. Even if there is a chance you will stand second, why 
should you, in the beginning itself, assume you are unfit? 
Nobody is inferior in this world. Even a mouse can save a 
lion under special circumstances. You are not as poor as 
you look. Still you have doubts. Again and again these 
dacoits of the sense organs will attack you and tell you, 
“Useless fellow, get up!”  
It was Buddha who had the same experiences of this 
kind. The great master was meditating on the possibility of 
attaining nirvana, and something came and told him, “Get 
up from this work.” All kinds of things were told to him: 
“This world is not so bad as you are imagining. What is 
wrong with this world? You have a beautiful palace. Have 
you not lived cosily? Your subjects are pleading to have 
your grace. All the gold and silver is with you. Also, you 
121 
 


===== PAGE 122 / 266 =====

have a long life, which is a blessing. Here is the beauty, here 
is the grandeur, here is the taste. Do you think the world is 
bitter always? There is also honey. Don’t you think the 
world is beautiful and it can grant you what you want? Is it 
so bad? Read human history. Great masters worked for 
erecting empires. How gloriously they lived! If you don’t 
listen to this advice, beware! I will thrash you and break 
your head.”  
And something else came and told Buddha, “Useless 
man, get up.” There was a hailstorm and big demon-like 
faces arose and told him, “Now you are on the last day of 
your life. Useless man, get up from this place. What are you 
thinking? All this world is wonderful. You have a wrong 
notion. You have an illusory perception that there is 
something beyond this. There is no ‘beyond’. This is 
everything. You are a foolish man. Get up!” Buddha would 
not listen to that advice either. Then it said, “You are a 
master already. You have already attained what you want to 
attain. Get up! Work for the world.” There are people who 
sometimes think they have already attained the goal, and 
the only thing left is to serve and uplift humanity, and bring 
heaven to the earth. This is also a temptation. 
All these stages one has to pass through. Difficulties of 
this kind will harass you and you will say, “I don’t know. I 
can’t understand all these things. I am drooping. Twenty 
years of meditation have brought nothing.” 
The Fourth Chapter begins with a great consolation to 
you. God is not so blind as not to understand your 
predicament. Your complaints are known to Him. 
Omniscience is the nature of God. Everything is known. 
122 
 


===== PAGE 123 / 266 =====

Even the movement of a cat in a the jungle, God knows. If a 
leaf moves, God is aware of it. Does He not know your 
difficulties? He incarnates Himself as a redemptive God at 
every crucial moment, if only your heart is for Him. 
Again the point comes: to the extent you are united 
with 
this 
adhidaiva 
prapancha, 
or 
the 
Supreme 
Transcendant Principle, if you cling to it honestly, the 
adhidaiva is your support. Go on surrendering yourself to 
it, and it will communicate your message to the higher 
cause. Instantaneous action will take place. God incarnating 
Himself is actually the descent of a higher measure of force 
of divinity to the level in which you are, to the level in 
which the crisis has arisen; and timeless being the nature of 
God, instantaneous also is His action. God does not come 
tomorrow, because there is no time for God. He does not 
take time to travel because He is not in space. Infinite 
power from a spaceless existence will act timelessly, 
instantaneously, at every crucial moment.  
Yadā yadā hi dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata, 
abhyutthānam adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmy aham 
(Gita 4.7); paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām, 
dharmasaṁsthāpanārthāya saṁbhavāmi yuge yuge (Gita 
4.8). These two verses are a glorious, consoling message 
coming from God Himself to frail man who is crying from 
moment to moment in the wilderness of his mortal 
existence. You are always under the protection of an all-
seeing eye. That you are suffering and nobody knows that 
you are suffering is not a fact. That you are not wanting to 
take advantage of the fact that somebody is looking to you 
and is willing to support you is your difficulty. The 
123 
 


===== PAGE 124 / 266 =====

assertion of your individuality by means of egoism takes 
possession of you again and again in the form of a doubt 
whether God will come or not. “I have never seen God, and 
He has never come and helped anybody up to this time. I 
have never seen Him helping, so how do I know that he will 
help me? After fifteen days of crying, He has not come. 
How do I know that on the sixteenth day he will come?” 
These doubts will harass you. 
He may sometimes take sixteen days to come on 
account of the inner obstructions created by your own 
tamasic karmas that may perhaps be working, but even 
tamasic karmas can be destroyed by the power of God. He 
can destroy even karmas. He can dissolve the parliament of 
the cosmos if He does not want any government. He 
doesn’t always have to stick to a parliamentary ordinance. 
Though He does that mostly, He can also dissolve it in one 
second. If your love of God is so intense, He can directly 
catch hold of you and protect you, but not through 
parliamentary or legal operations. If this faith, which is 
bhakti, knowledge and devotion combined, is predominant 
in you, there is a powerful sattva action. Immediate action 
will take place. 
But our attachment to this body and our consideration 
of an external relationship with human affairs, our mortal 
entanglements, are so intense that often this kind of faith 
cannot arise in us. Only when we are sinking in the sea, 
sometimes this faith arises. “I have lost everything. I am not 
able to stand. Even the ground is shaking.” When 
everything is gone and nothing will come, if that threat of 
124 
 


===== PAGE 125 / 266 =====

even a moment’s survival takes possession of you, you will 
feel God, the real God.  
Otherwise, in ordinary circumstances, this faith is 
shaken by the fact that you seem to be involved in certain 
realities of life. The realities of life should desert you 
completely. Nobody should want you. You are an 
unwanted person in the world, crucified. At that time, God 
will come. “Oh, you want to crucify me? I am not wanted in 
this world.” All your love for things vanishes in one second. 
All your consideration for that which is externally oriented 
goes. Neither your family wants you, nor the world wants 
you. Such conditions are not uncommon in the history of 
humanity. Read human history. Who wants you, finally? 
Your adjustment with the whims and fancies of other 
people somehow or other makes you feel that you are 
wanted by others. Do not make that adjustment, and see 
what happens to you. You will be thrown into the ocean in 
one second. This is the world. Humankind is made in this 
way; everything is made in this way. 
But why do you invite such conditions that you should 
be crucified by humanity? Doctors need not fall sick in 
order to understand the sickness of a patient. Their wisdom 
will tell them what kind of predicament it is. So you need 
not be turned out of this world by force. Honourably you 
can go from this world by understanding what the world is 
made of. “It is good to quit while the quitting is good,” as 
they say. Why should you be thrown out? 
This circumstance of your being basically involved in 
the higher purpose of life will bring the faith that is 
necessary for invoking God’s presence in you, and God 
125 
 


===== PAGE 126 / 266 =====

shall manifest Himself. Infinite are the avataras of God, as 
infinite as the rays of the Sun. Numberless are the occasions 
when God manifests Himself, and in numberless ways and 
methods of action. It does not mean that always the same 
kind of form will be sent. It is not that He will come always 
as Rama, Krishna, Govinda, Christ, etc. God can manifest 
Himself as a remedial force under conditions which are 
historically, 
geographically, 
socially, 
psychologically 
specific. When it is necessary, God can come as an 
incarnation of whirlwind, tornado, epidemic, war, 
cataclysm. Or He may come as a blessing of heightened 
power in particular nations. He may bring a redeeming 
force and help to a personality. He can make you even 
materially wealthy. Everything is possible for Him. 
As critical conditions in life are manifold in their 
nature, it is not that everyone has the same kind of 
problem. It does not mean throughout history we have only 
one kind of difficulty in humanity. Manifold and endless 
are the peculiarities of the problems of existence, and 
endless also are the ways of His incarnation. Any form, any 
way, any method can be adopted by this Supreme Being, 
according to the circumstance of the case. What is the 
nature of the difficulty? The counterpart of it will be the 
nature of the incarnation. 
Whenever a difficult situation arises between the 
subject and the object, we may say—the world and the 
individual have a critical clash of purposes and it is difficult 
to solve it humanly—a superhuman force descends. 
Actually, human problems cannot be solved by mere 
human beings. No man can solve another man’s problem 
126 
 


===== PAGE 127 / 266 =====

because, after all, he is also a man like the other person. The 
possibility of solving human problems arises only if there is 
a person or a group of people who are not simply human 
beings, but somebody more than that. You require a Super-
leader to render real help to people. All great leaders were 
Super-persons. It is not just a Tom, Dick and Harry saying, 
“I will come and save humanity.” No Tom can do that, 
because every Tom is like every other Tom. Great masters, 
leaders, geniuses, statesmen who have worked wonders in 
the nations of the world were not ordinary human 
individuals. They were Super-individuals to some extent. 
This Super-personality is the way in which God 
manifests Himself in political conditions, in social 
circumstances, in educational fields, even in spiritual life—
visions which are very consoling and satisfying, and 
experiences which will thrill you. In deep meditation you 
can also be regarded as a kind of incarnation of God.  
Thus, these two verses which say something briefly 
about the manner of the coming of God into the world of 
people is an explanation of the entry of the Absolute into 
the relative, the Universal acting in the particulars, the 
cosmic in action every moment of time, just as the whole 
organism of the body acts if there is a little ache in the toe. 
Wherever there is an ache or pain or difficulty felt in the 
limbs of the body, the whole anabolic activity, the 
constructive forces, act suddenly; there is a war taking 
place, as it were, between these intruding monsters who 
create pain in the body and the powers that are constructive 
and cause its survival. In a similar manner, instantaneous 
action is taking place in all things in the world because the 
127 
 


===== PAGE 128 / 266 =====

whole universe is a single organism animated by a single 
intelligence. 
Chapter 8 
THE STAGES OF YOGA 
We have almost entirely covered the fundamentals of 
the Gita teaching. Whatever follows is in the form of an 
exposition in greater detail of what has already been very 
pithily and briefly stated in the preceding chapters. 
I already mentioned to you that many of the 
commentators of the Gita believe that the Second Chapter 
is the seed of the whole of the Gita. Every chapter from the 
Third onwards till the end is an exposition of one or two of 
the verses already occurring in the Second Chapter. 
Especially 
Madhusudhana 
Saraswati, 
in 
his 
classic 
commentary, explicitly states this, and whenever he starts 
commenting on a particular chapter, he quotes the relevant 
seed sloka of the Second Chapter, showing thereby that the 
root of the entire gospel is in the Second Chapter itself, 
which is Sankhya and Yoga combined; and in our 
expositions, which have been in sufficient detail, we have 
covered a wide area of knowledge, perhaps omitting 
nothing important.  
The name of God does not occur until the Fourth 
Chapter commences. There is a peculiar situation which is 
wholly artharthi, wholly worldly, in the First Chapter, and 
the commencement of the direct teaching in the Second, 
and an implementation of this teaching in a more profound 
manner in the Third. The emphasis up to the Third 
Chapter has been the duty of the individual, the work that 
128 
 


===== PAGE 129 / 266 =====

is incumbent upon every person, but the name of God has 
not been taken.  
The operations of God as incarnations have been 
touched upon for the first time in the commencement of 
the 
Fourth 
Chapter. 
Previously 
we 
noticed 
the 
circumstances under which God takes incarnations, 
avataras, to which I need not revert now. We can proceed 
further to know what other things we can gather from the 
coming chapters. I have taken a lot of time to take you to 
the conclusion of the Third Chapter, but as we have not 
much time at our disposal in the course of this Academy 
session, I have to go more rapidly over the themes that 
follow; otherwise, it will take another three months to go to 
the end of the Eighteenth Chapter with this extent of detail. 
Apart from the brief statement of the nature of the 
incarnation of God in the beginning of the Fourth Chapter, 
this chapter also touches upon certain other themes which 
are not relevant to the avatara of God or the very concept 
of God, but to actual Yoga practice and the understanding 
of the nature of work or action which, pertinently, is the 
theme of the Third Chapter. 
Karmaṇy akarma yaḥ paśyed akarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ, 
sa buddhimān manuṣyeṣu sa yuktaḥ kṛtsnakarmakṛt (Gita 
4.18). It was told to us that work we must. Silent we cannot 
be. Na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarmakṛt (Gita 
3.5): Not a moment can pass without your being active in 
some way or the other. Karmaṇy evā ‘dhikāras te mā 
phaleṣu kadācana (Gita 2.47). It was also added that your 
duty is to engage yourself in such action as can be regarded 
as a participation in the cosmic process, but you cannot 
129 
 


===== PAGE 130 / 266 =====

expect the fruit of that action because the expectation of a 
fruit of a particular engagement is to consider the value of 
your work in a future context. If the value of what you do in 
the future has no value in the present, then you cannot take 
sufficient interest in your work. The present is a means to 
what you are expecting in the future, and so your eye will 
be on what will be expected in the future and you will have 
no interest in what you are doing. “Whatever I am doing, 
that is a different matter. It must bring that result.” And 
you will adjust and adapt your modus operandi of work 
now in such a manner as, in your opinion, is productive of 
that result in your mind. There will be some kind of 
selfishness creeping into your so-called duty because this 
duty that you perform is done for the sake of something 
which is other than duty. 
What emanates from you is sacrifice; but the fruit that 
you expect is not something that emanates from you, so the 
sacrifice is spoiled to some extent. You throw cold water, as 
it were, on the yajna when you perform your duty with the 
expectation of a result that has to follow. Every duty is a 
sacrifice, a kind of sharing of your personality to some 
extent. But what kind of sharing is there when you are 
expecting something from it? “I should get whatever I have 
given, and perhaps I should get more than what I have 
given.” This is the attitude that may subtly enter into your 
mind when you work and perform your so-called duty with 
a creative interest for the fruit of what you do. 
As we are living in a world of causes and effects which 
are separated from each other, the cause produces the 
effect; therefore, the effect is a future event that follows 
130 
 


===== PAGE 131 / 266 =====

from the present context of the cause. We are bound by this 
causal relation in a whirl of space and time, and we cannot 
understand what duty for duty’s sake can be. You may go 
on scratching your head one thousand times to understand 
how it is possible for you to work only for the sake of work, 
expecting nothing from it. Your mind will be telling you 
again and again that you are a foolish person. Who will do 
work for no purpose? Purposeless action is meaningless 
action. The moment you introduce a purpose into it, 
somehow or other you bring into it the futurity of its 
purposiveness. You distinguish between the present and the 
future, and you are not in the place where you are 
working—you are in some other place which is yet to be—
and your work does not become a cosmic participation; it 
becomes an expectation of what is not yet present. 
This is the difficulty that we face in understanding this 
pithy statement that your duty is to do duty only: karmaṇy 
evā 
‘dhikāras 
te 
mā 
phaleṣu 
kadācana. 
Mā 
karmaphalahetur bhūr. Do not be attached to the fruit of 
your action. Mā te saṅgo ‘stv akarmaṇi. Then you may say, 
“Why this problem? I don’t want to do anything at all, 
because if I do something you cause trouble to me by saying 
that ‘You are not working properly. You have some eye to 
the fruit’; and so I will do nothing.” 
Attachment to the fruit of action and attachment to 
non-action are equally bad. Do not have an eye on what is 
to follow from your action and the fruit thereof, and do not 
sit quiet because you are afraid of being entangled in some 
mistake that you may commit in the performance of duty. 
Fear of mistake in the performance of duty is not to be 
131 
 


===== PAGE 132 / 266 =====

regarded as inaction. It is also an action. Fear should not be 
the ground for your attitude toward anything. Right action 
is not what you do out of your own agency consciousness, 
but out of your expanded feeling of a sense of belonging to 
the cosmic whole. Tasmād asaktaḥ satataṁ kāryaṁ karma 
samācara, asakto hy ācaran karma param āpnoti pūruṣaḥ 
(Gita 3.19): Unattached, therefore, do your work. 
The sense of being unattached is also to be understood 
properly. You are told again and again: be not attached. 
From what are you going to be detached? You are going to 
be detached from your concept of the nature of work itself. 
Work is a mental operation, basically; it is not a physical 
action. That has been told in the Third Chapter. The 
movement of the body cannot be regarded as work. The 
association of the mind to the work of the body is actually 
work. Therefore, participation in the cosmic process being 
the real nature of unselfish action, this has to be hammered 
into your mind again and again. Finally, you will realise 
that you cannot do anything worthwhile in this world 
without entertaining in yourself an element of God-
consciousness. That is why until the Vishvarupa-darshan 
was shown in the Eleventh Chapter, Arjuna had doubts and 
more doubts, endlessly. The doubts ceased only when the 
Visvarupa was shown. Unless cosmic consciousness enters 
into you, you will never be able to understand what actually 
is happening to you. 
So there is a gradational ascent of the teaching of the 
Gita right up to the Eleventh Chapter, which is the 
apotheosis of the teaching. Yogasaṁnyastakarmāṇaṁ 
jñānasaṁ-chinnasaṁśayam, ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi 
132 
 


===== PAGE 133 / 266 =====

nibadhnanti 
dhanaṁjaya 
(Gita 
4.41). 
Yogasaṁnyastakarmāṇaṁ: having renounced attachment 
to the fruit of the action by the Yoga of the consciousness of 
universal participation. Yoga is the consciousness of your 
participation in the universal process. Having entertained 
this consciousness, having established yourself in this 
consciousness of your being only an instrument or a 
participant in the cosmic process, renounce any kind of 
isolation of your work from the fruit that may follow. 
Actually, no fruit can follow from the work that you do, 
because the work that you appear to be doing is only a 
necessary sharing of your personality with the Cosmic 
Person. You are not working, actually speaking, when you 
seem to be working. You are only sharing. It is a dialogue 
between man and God—a constant Nara-Narayana 
Samvada, Sri Krishna-Arjuna Samvada taking place in your 
demeanour. Every moment of time you are having a 
concourse with God in your approach to things, in your 
attitude, generally speaking, and in anything that you do. In 
everything you do, you are contacting God. You have a 
dialogue with the Absolute, with nature, with all things. 
So with this Yoga, in which you have to get established, 
you have to renounce all the particularities, isolations, 
externalities and space-time involvements. Isolation of any 
kind of factor from actual performance of your work 
separates you from the integratedness that is essential in 
your participation. The moment you think of a fruit that is 
outside the work that you do, you have sundered your 
personality from the environment to which you should 
actually belong, but to which you do not want to belong. 
133 
 


===== PAGE 134 / 266 =====

The environment of the process which seems to be 
producing the fruit, so-called, of the action, is a part of your 
larger personality; therefore, the fruit cannot be regarded as 
something isolated from the work, and in a way you may 
say the work itself is the fruit. Duty automatically brings 
privileges, and you should not say, “What privilege will 
accrue to me if I do this work? How much salary will 
come?” There is no salary in this world.  
The Gita’s concept of work is not the concept of social 
welfare work as politicians and social welfare workers 
think. It is not social welfare work, it is not commerce, it is 
not business, it is not political administration; it is a 
different thing altogether. It is a divinity that is expected to 
dominate every nook and corner of your involvement in 
life. That meaning is involved in this one word which 
comes towards the end of the Fourth Chapter: 
yogasaṁnyastakarmāṇaṁ.  
Doubts may arise: “What are you saying? I can’t 
understand.” With the wisdom of the analysis and synthesis 
of the processes of creation, which you have been through 
in the study of the earlier chapters, rend asunder all doubts 
from your mind: jñānasaṁchinnasaṁśayam. A very pithy, 
very meaningful verse is this. Yogasaṁnyastakarmāṇaṁ 
jñānasaṁchinnasaṁśayam: Having thus breached the gulf 
that appears to be there between you and the so-called fruit 
of action by establishment in this Yoga of the consciousness 
of the participation of yourself in the cosmic process, 
integrating that atmosphere of fruit in your own self, and 
removing all the doubts by the wisdom of this scripture, 
ātmavantaṁ na karmāṇi nibadhnanti: you become the true 
134 
 


===== PAGE 135 / 266 =====

Self at that time. It is only when you understand what duty 
is in the sense of participation that you become the true Self 
that you are. You have a larger and wider Self apart from 
the little self that you seem to be in the integration that you 
are effecting by clubbing together the entire atmosphere 
with your own self. You widen your consciousness, widen 
yourself, and you become the Self that you are really, and 
not the self that you appear to be. 
As a little self you seem to be working even in the 
dream state, but you are a larger self in the waking state. 
The so-called distractions and diversification, and the 
varieties of the dream world, get absorbed into a larger self 
of your waking consciousness. In this Yoga that is briefly 
stated here, you raise your lower self to the higher Self that 
you are, and you become atmavan—true possessor of your 
own Self. You have lost yourself now by the wrong notion 
that things are outside you; therefore, you have to possess 
them or reject them. The desire to possess and reject arises 
on account of the wrong notion that the things that you 
want to possess or reject are outside you, not knowing that 
they are organically connected to your higher self, which is 
your true Self. 
If, with this consciousness, you perform work in this 
world 
as 
a 
cosmic 
participation—na 
karmāṇi 
nibadhnanti—action cannot bind you. The karma theory 
will break, and no result will follow as a binding factor 
through the work that you perform. The wind blows; it is 
not bound by what it does. The sun shines; it is not bound 
by its shining. A river flows to the ocean that is there before 
it. They are not bound because they do not have self-
135 
 


===== PAGE 136 / 266 =====

consciousness. When you work thus with super-
consciousness of your larger individuality, wider selfhood, 
you are free from the so-called bondage of work. 
Asmād ajñānasañbhūtaṁ hṛtsthaṁ jñānāsinātmanaḥ: 
Therefore Arjuna, rend asunder, break this darkness of 
ignorance that is veiling your consciousness. You have to 
rend asunder this veil by the effort of your own mind. Here 
is a very concentrated statement on what Yoga practice is. 
More details will be told in the Sixth Chapter. By Yoga, by 
jnana, by attainment of true Selfhood, you pierce through 
the veil of ignorance which makes you feel always that you 
are a finite individual, not knowing the fact that there is an 
infinitude that is around you in the form of this very vast 
space-time cosmos. This space-time cosmos itself is your 
larger self. Your true being is as wide as this vast space. Can 
you imagine that you are as wide as space?  
The consciousness that you are finite is also involved in 
the consciousness of there being something above the 
finite. How would you know that the finite is actually finite? 
How do you know that you are bound, unless there is a 
consciousness of it being possible not to be bound? You 
have already assumed the presence of an infinitude of 
yourself in the very consciousness of your being finite. A 
finite thing really cannot know that it is finite. As a larger 
involvement of it is already there beyond the boundary of 
finitude, it vaguely feels that it has to break through this 
finitude. Unless you are immortal in your nature, you will 
not fear death. A thing that is really bound to death cannot 
fear death. The fear of extinction of personality, which is 
death, is due to the immortality of your essence. You are 
136 
 


===== PAGE 137 / 266 =====

really undying in nature; therefore, you would not like to 
know that death will take place. And you are restless in 
your finitude because you unconsciously feel inside that 
there is something more in you than the finitude that is 
harassing you. Unless you become as large as space itself, 
your finitude will not diminish. As wide as space and 
enduring as time has to be yourself. Infinity and eternity 
should blend together in one single experience, which is 
God-experience. Until this is reached, you will never have 
peace here. Even the heaven of the gods is not adequate for 
your longing.  
Brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir brahmāgnau brahmaṇā 
hutam, 
brahmaiva 
tena 
gantavyaṁ 
brahma-karma-
samādhinā (Gita 4.24) is a little higher teaching that comes 
afterwards. The consciousness of the Universal should 
decide and determine your every thought, feeling and 
action. Whatever you do should be in the light of the 
Universal, of which the so-called particular is a part and 
parcel. The consequence that is in your mind when you 
perform an action should be considered as integrally 
connected with the action itself. It is not something that 
will take place in the future. Then all action becomes a little 
bit of the Universal, and it is not a little work that you do 
from your own initiative. All that you do is an offering to 
the Absolute. This is the greatest yajna, or sacrifice, that can 
be conceived. 
A sacrament which is dedicated to the Supreme Being is 
brahmārpaṇaṁ. What you offer to the Supreme Absolute 
cannot be something that is external to you. That which is 
external to you does not really belong to you, so it cannot 
137 
 


===== PAGE 138 / 266 =====

be offered. How will you give a gift of something which is 
not your property? What is really yours can be offered; then 
it becomes charity, a gift. That which is totally outside you 
is not your property, because of the fact it is outside. So any 
amount of material gift is no gift unless you yourself are 
also there as a part of the gift. Something of you has to go.  
What you have to offer to the Supreme Absolute is 
Atman, and not anything material. Atman is offered to the 
Paramatman. The jiva consciousness is dedicated to the 
Universal Consciousness. You are offered, nobody else. You 
offer yourself in the altar of the great yajna of Universal 
Consciousness—brahmārpaṇaṁ. This is the greatest 
dedication that you can give to God. If God asks you, 
“What will you give me?” you cannot offer God some 
bananas or sweets because they are not your possessions. 
Only you are your possession. You have no right over 
anything in this world except your own self. Not even one 
needle can be your property, so the offering that you have 
to make to the Universal Being is only yourself. This is 
jnana yajna, the wisdom sacrifice, as it is so called. Into the 
flame of the wisdom of the all-pervading nature of God, 
you offer yourself in the consciousness of a practical 
annihilation of your individual existence. 
When you offer something into the holy fire in a yajna 
or a sacrifice, you seem to be offering some substance—
some material of ghee or rice, etc. But here in this wisdom 
sacrifice, what you offer is not some article from the world 
outside. It is a part of yourself. A little of yourself goes 
gradually with every little sense of belonging to the whole. 
This is brahma havir. Brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam: You 
138 
 


===== PAGE 139 / 266 =====

offer yourself into the flame or the fire of God so that you 
get burnt into the ashes of a non-entity altogether. 
Who is offering this? You are offering. Who are you? 
Now another difficulty is placed before you. The offering is 
not made by you; it is made by itself, to which you are 
making the offering. It is offering itself to itself. The war of 
the Mahabharata is waged by the Universal Virat. It is not 
engaged upon by Arjuna, Bhima, the Kauravas. “I have 
come to engage upon this great work.” Kālosmi 
lokakṣayakṛt pravṛddha (Gita 11.32). The Viratsvarupa, the 
Cosmic Form, speaks in the Eleventh Chapter. The great 
war is the universal war. It is motivated by the Universal 
Being for its universal purpose, and the Universal is 
offering itself in the sacrifice of the yajna of the 
Mahabharata war. You cannot lift even a finger unless the 
central Universal Will operates, even as without the order 
issued by the total muscular setup of your personality, your 
fingers cannot lift, your eyelids cannot move; so is anything 
that you think or seem to be doing in this world. Even this 
so-called yajna that you are trying to perform is a 
motivation that comes from the Universal Being. The 
Universal offers itself to the Universal. God knows God. 
God contemplates God. God offers Himself to God: 
brahmaṇā hutam.  
Brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ: The aim, the purpose, the 
destination of this kind of cosmic sacrifice is the attainment 
of God only. God, through the performance which is also 
God, reaches God through the sacrifice, which is also a 
movement of God within Himself. This is the drama of 
God in this world which is Himself, where He is the 
139 
 


===== PAGE 140 / 266 =====

director and the actor, the arena and the light, the audience 
and the performance. This is the cosmic drama that God 
seems to be playing for His own pleasure, and not for your 
pleasure, because you cannot have any pleasure unless this 
pleasure is there behind you, animating your existence.  
Brahmaiva tena gantavyaṁ brahma-karma-samādhinā. 
This kind of sacrifice as mentioned is a kind of communion 
that you establish with God. Brahma-karma-samadhi is the 
inner communion cosmically attempted by your so-called 
individuality. Samadhi is communion, equilibration of 
consciousness, an establishment of total harmony between 
the subjective and objective universe so that no one knows 
who is seeing what—whether the world is seeing you or you 
are seeing the world. They coalesce into a single existence. 
That is called samadhi. And in this consciousness of the 
sacrifice of yourself in God-consciousness, you are entering 
into a veritable samadhi condition while you are actually 
working in the world. Sahaja samadhi is also the name 
given to this kind of experience. Varieties of samadhi, or 
divine communion, are described. In one state of samadhi 
there is an obliteration of your existence, a consciousness of 
a flood inundating you from all sides, and an experience of 
Being as such; in the other state of samadhi you see the 
variety of the world, and yet you are in the state of the 
Infinite. 
Are you not seeing the variety of the limbs of your 
body? So many fingers, so many toes, so many limbs, so 
many kinds of operation in the alimentary canal, in the 
respiratory system, in the blood circulation; but are you 
different things? You are one single, indivisible entity in 
140 
 


===== PAGE 141 / 266 =====

spite of the multifarious activities that seem to be taking 
place in your organism. The unity consciousness is 
pervading the diversity of activity even in the physical 
organism. So is the experience that you will have in one 
kind of communion where you will see the whole world lit 
with the light of God. Trees will be scintillating with 
radiance, mountains will be shining like diamonds, the sun 
will pour forth rays of nectar, the moon will be inundating 
you with beauty, and you will not actually know whether 
you are in hell or in which place. This is the penultimate 
samadhi, as some people call it. Some of the Upanishads go 
into great details about this. The Yoga Vasishtha, the great 
mystical text, is very expanded in its exposition in these 
matters of the gradational consciousness of the seeker in 
communions which come one after the other, which are all 
designated by different words. 
There will be a flash of consciousness in the beginning. 
You will see lightning flashing. As if lightning strikes in the 
sky, your mind will experience a kind of delightful lightning 
flash. It will come and go. Yoga does not come always, all 
twenty-four hours of the day. There will be a flash, as if you 
are seeing something which is not of this world. A vision, a 
sound, a taste, an odour, some music or a touch which is 
celestial in its nature will be your casual experience 
occasionally. This is the effect of one kind of communion 
which your mind establishes with the higher levels. 
After some time the communion will intensify itself, 
and you will feel a sense of belonging to this light that is in 
front of you. You will not merely see or hear or touch or 
smell these experiences as if they come from outside, as if 
141 
 


===== PAGE 142 / 266 =====

they are the music of the spheres; you will feel that you are 
somehow connected to these operations and you are a part 
of this orchestra of this celestial being. You are not merely 
the listener of the music; you are participating in it in some 
way or the other, and you will feel an ecstasy, as if you want 
to dance. This will be another communion that will 
intensify itself a little further on. 
The Yoga Vasishtha says the experience will intensity 
itself further, and you will see lightning flashes everywhere 
in the sky—not only one strip in one place. It will be a 
floodlit sky, and you will also be a part of that experience. 
You will see radiance in your own personality, and one 
flame will not be able to distinguish itself from the larger 
flame which is like a conflagration in the whole sky. Then 
the light alone will be there. These are the communions. 
Brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma havir brahmāgnau brahmaṇā 
hutam, 
brahmaiva 
tena 
gantavyaṁ 
brahmakarmasamādhinā. 
All this experience should not be expected to come like 
a windfall, though sometimes it can be a windfall. There are 
miracles possible in this world. Sudden experiences are also 
practicable due to the maturity of some of the karmas of 
your past lives, but usually it is an exercise that is expected 
on your part through the Yoga process, as is very 
systematically described for instance in the Sutras of 
Patanjali—Ashtanga Yoga, the eight stages. 
The process of this practice of Yoga is again briefly 
described in the Fifth Chapter, which is the cue, as it were, 
to the further exposition in the Sixth Chapter. Sparśān 
kṛtvā 
bahir 
bāhyāṁś 
cakṣuś 
caivāntare 
bhruvoḥ, 
142 
 


===== PAGE 143 / 266 =====

prāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā nāsābhyantaracāriṇau (Gita 
5.27); 
yatendriyamanobuddhirmunir 
mokṣaparāyaṇaḥ, 
vigatecchābhayakrodho yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ (Gita 
5.28). Two verses will tell you briefly what Yoga is. First of 
all, you have to shut out all the entry of external 
consciousness into your meditational mood. This is done 
by what is called pratyahara technique. The contacts of the 
senses with externality have to gradually be diminished in 
their intensity, which you should do by diligent practice.  
The objects of the senses have such an impact upon the 
senses that whenever you see something desirable or 
abhorrent, you are disturbed in your mind; therefore, in the 
initial stages of Yoga practice, the student is advised to 
place himself or herself in an atmosphere in which there 
will not be temptations. Do not be in a supermarket or a 
cinema hall or a theatre. These are not places for 
meditation. As far as possible, also isolate yourself 
physically from atmospheres of temptation and distraction, 
disturbance, agitation, and feelings of sorrow. Physical 
isolation is important—otherwise, why do people come to 
an ashram, Uttarkashi, Gangotri, and other places? 
And then, when you have succeeded to some extent in 
weaning yourself from the consciousness of the desirables 
and the undesirables, you have to chalk out a process of the 
concentration of the mind on the objective that is before 
you—what it is that you are aiming at in your Yoga. So the 
verse says, sparśān kṛtvā bahir bāhyāṁś: externalising them 
totally, not allowing the mind to come in vital contact with 
anything that is an object of desire.  
143 
 


===== PAGE 144 / 266 =====

Cakṣuś caivāntare bhruvoḥ: not actually opening the 
eyes entirely nor closing entirely. Semi-closing of the eyes is 
prescribed here. Commentators tell you that this 
prescription is specifically because of the fact that if you 
open the eyes entirely, you will go on seeing things and 
there will be some kind of distraction. If you close the eyes 
entirely, you may fall asleep. So the position of the eyelids is 
supposed to be as if you are looking at the tip of the nose. 
Some say you may actually concentrate on the tip of the 
nose, but the actual significance of the prescription seems 
to be, it should be as if you are looking at the tip of the 
nose. You are conscious, and yet not externally conscious. 
This consciousness of something which is not actually 
an external consciousness is also the reason why often 
people prescribe early morning hours for meditation. In 
sleep there is total unconsciousness, and in waking there is 
external consciousness. Neither of these states is suitable for 
actual meditation. So early morning, Brahma-murta, just 
before 
sunrise 
or 
somewhat 
at 
that 
time, 
your 
consciousness seems to be just awakening to a perception 
of the world outside but it has not actually perceived the 
world outside, nor are you sleeping. So there is a semi-
consciousness. It is a consciousness, not unconsciousness, 
not outside consciousness—a consciousness, pure and 
simple. This is the reason, they say, for the instruction that 
the early morning hours would be good for meditation. 
Similarly is the case with the instruction that before you 
go to bed would also be a suitable time because you are 
slowly absorbing all your activities at the end of the day. 
The mind becomes calm; the senses become less active. A 
144 
 


===== PAGE 145 / 266 =====

similar state as in Brahma-murta will follow to some extent 
before you go to bed in the evening, so both in the morning 
and in the evening you may try to practice Yoga. 
Sparśān kṛtvā bahir bāhyāṁś cakṣuś caivāntare 
bhruvoḥ: concentrating your mind in this manner. 
Sometimes it is said that you can concentrate on the centre 
of the eyebrows. This verse also refers to that. Cakṣuś 
caivāntare bhruvoḥ: The middle of the eyebrows can be 
regarded as the point of concentration. It is not that 
everyone should concentrate only in this way. This is one 
way among many other possible ways. One of the reasons 
for the efficacy of concentration in this manner on the 
centre of the eyebrows is psychologically, mystically, from 
an occult point of view, it is said that the point between the 
eyebrows is the centre of the mind in waking 
consciousness. The mind is supposed to be working 
through the particular spot here, through the brain which 
acts through the centre of the eyebrows, the Ajna Chakra as 
it is called in occult science. In dream the mind is supposed 
to be operating in the throat, and in sleep it goes to the 
heart. So as the mind is already there in the waking state 
spontaneously occupying its own seat in the point between 
the eyebrows, it will be comfortable for the mind to 
concentrate there itself. You just make it work in the very 
place where it is sitting. That is perhaps the reason why this 
instruction is given that you can concentrate on the point 
between the two eyebrows: cakṣuś caivāntare bhruvoḥ.  
Prāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā: When you breathe in and 
breathe out, the mind also oscillates like a pendulum. The 
more intense is the heaving process of breathing, the more 
145 
 


===== PAGE 146 / 266 =====

is the agitation that the mind feels. And so the seatedness of 
yourself in a calm and quiet posture will also eliminate the 
intensity of the activity of the prana. The inner breath and 
the outer breath will slow down to some extent, as if they 
merge together. It is prana and apana—prana is the 
exterior breath, and apana is the interior breath. You 
breathe out, the prana is operating; you breathe in, the 
apana is there. Both will join together, as it were, when the 
mind is calm and quiet: prāṇāpānau samau kṛtvā. 
Nāsābhyantaracāriṇau: You will not know whether you 
are breathing through the right nostril or the left nostril. It 
is just a little breathing in a harmonious manner. 
Yatendriyamanobuddhi: restraining the five senses, the 
mind and the intellect in the manner described in the 
earlier chapters, and in the light of what we have studied 
already, to which process a little reference was made 
towards the end of the Third Chapter of how we can 
control the kama and krodha, desire and anger, restraining 
thus the senses, the mind and the intellect. Muni: Silent, 
calm and quiet, non-interfering, minding one’s own 
business—such a person is muni, or you may call him a 
saint if you like, wanting nothing but liberation of the self. 
What do you want? “Liberation, Universal Existence, and 
everything conducive to that, which is my duty. I am not 
interested in anything else.” Wanting only that, he is a 
mumukshu, wanting God: mokṣaparāyaṇaḥ. 
Vigatecchābhayakrodha: free from every kind of 
binding mortal desire, having no fear because God is in 
front of you. He is at the back, He is on the right side, He is 
on the left. He is guarding you, so what fear do you have? 
146 
 


===== PAGE 147 / 266 =====

Therefore, vigatecchābhayakrodha: without desire, without 
fear, without anger; yaḥ: whoever is in this condition; sadā 
mukta eva saḥ: that person should be considered to be 
already liberated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
147 
 


===== PAGE 148 / 266 =====

Chapter 9 
THE YOGA OF MEDITATION 
The Yoga of meditation is the subject of the Sixth 
Chapter of the Gita. At the very beginning, the Lord tells us 
that the art of Yoga is a system of raising oneself by oneself. 
In meditation you qualitatively improve yourself and do 
not merely carry on a quantitative process for a long time. 
Many days, several months, are occupied with the act of 
meditation, but it is not just that you have been doing 
something for a long time. Also you have improved 
yourself; you have become a better person through 
meditation. The betterment is the qualitative aspect of it. 
We have a Self; everybody has a Self, usually called the 
Atman. “My self has been engaged in the work of 
meditation.” This is what you generally say. This self of 
yours is one kind of self. It is one layer of a possible long 
series of different layers of the same self. These layers of self 
are the determining factors of the quality of your being. 
What sort of person you are as far as your quality of 
existence is concerned will be decided by the level of 
selfhood that you are rooted in. 
There is, for instance, the instinctive self, the sensory 
self, the physical self, the involved self, the social self, and so 
on, all which mean that the self of the person—the you, the 
I, or whatever it is—is not existing for itself independently 
but is conditioned by certain associations such as sensation, 
instinctive desire, social relation, and the like. Mr. so-and-
so is a particular kind of self. That self is decided upon 
148 
 


===== PAGE 149 / 266 =====

qualitatively by the kind of social relation that the self is 
maintaining, and you know what the social relation is. 
You are something in human society—something 
important, something unimportant, something responsible, 
something 
not 
responsible, 
something 
recognised, 
something unrecognised. The society has something to say 
about you, and that depends upon what kind of position 
you occupy in the social setup. Your social position very 
much influences what you are. When you think about 
yourself, you will also think—and perhaps only think—in 
the sense of your involvement in society. Suppose you are 
an official in the government; you will be thinking only that 
you are a magistrate. You will not think that you are the son 
of your mother. Though you are perhaps that, you will 
never forget that you are a magistrate self. The magistrate 
self has become so much involved in your being that you 
are only that. This is an example of the social self, which 
everyone is, in some way or the other. Your involvement in 
external society in any manner whatsoever will condition 
you and make you a social self.  
That is to say, you are not independent because you 
always define yourself in terms of something with which 
you are associated. You feel you are rich, you are poor, you 
are male, you are female, etc. These definitions that you 
unwittingly foist upon yourself tell you that you are not 
independent, and cannot be regarded as free. To the extent 
you are dependent on feelings, instincts, social contexts and 
relations, to that extent you are a bound soul. 
But meditation is the art of the achievement of freedom. 
Perhaps it expects you to achieve the highest kind of 
149 
 


===== PAGE 150 / 266 =====

freedom—untrammelled not only by external relations, but 
by conditions given by space and time. Such kind of 
absolute freedom is your expectation through spiritual 
meditation. So a seeker of this highest freedom in the 
spiritual self will analyse and assess the category of selfhood 
in which he is, or to which he belongs. How do you define 
yourself?  
The Bhagavadgita says, in one or two verses, that you 
have to raise your lower self by the power of the higher Self. 
You should not be always a physical self, an instinctive self, 
a desire-filled self, a sensory self or a social self. The Self 
cannot be so described as something conditioned by other 
things. The very meaning of Self is unconditionality, 
indivisibility and self-sufficiency. If the self of yours is 
inadequate in some way, you cling to certain associations 
outside, as I mentioned, so that you look like an adequate 
self. But the Self cannot be made adequate or self-sufficient 
by any accumulation of external factors. Society, objects of 
sense, or even the satisfaction of the physical body cannot 
make the Self a better Self because the Self cannot be 
associated with anything other than its own Self. 
The meaning of Self is non-objectivity. It cannot be 
externalised in any manner whatsoever, and it cannot be 
related to anything. The Self cannot be a relation of 
somebody else, and somebody cannot be a relation of the 
Self. As long as you feel that you are related to something—
to property, to selfhood, to family relation, to position in 
society, whatever it is—your self is not unconditioned. It is 
a grieving self, limited self, finite self, dependent self, a 
slavish self. This is the lower self. The Gita instruction is 
150 
 


===== PAGE 151 / 266 =====

that this lower self has to be purified and raised to the level 
of the higher Self. Uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ (Gita 6.5): By 
the higher Self you raise the lower self. 
As we have studied earlier, the higher Self is the 
adhidaiva, the conscious transcendent principle of divinity 
ranging above yourself as an individual, as well as above the 
outside thing with which you are related. 
Now, the higher Self, this adhidaiva, also has various 
degrees of manifestation, and these degrees depend upon 
the kind of relation that you have between yourself and the 
world outside. There are layers of creation; there are realms 
of being, degrees of reality. This earth plane—this physical 
space-time complex—is one degree of the manifestation of 
reality, and in this particular material field, we establish one 
kind of relationship with the objects outside. Therefore, this 
transcendent adhidaiva will operate in a particular manner, 
taking into consideration the physicality and the nature of 
the type of world in which we are living. 
But there are higher worlds. There are prapanchas—
Bhuloka, Bhuvarloka, Svarloka, Maharloka, Janaloka, 
Tapoloka and Satyaloka, as they say. Seven realms of being 
are described in the scriptures. As you rise higher and 
higher from one realm to another realm, the adhidaiva also 
becomes more and more transparent, more expanded and 
wider in dimension, so that the distance between you and 
the object outside gets diminished.  
Now the object is very far away from you; the world 
does not seem to have any kind of living connection with 
you. One person has no relation to another person; each 
person is standing outside like a planet in the sky, 
151 
 


===== PAGE 152 / 266 =====

apparently not having anything to do with another. That I 
have no connection with you, that the subject has no 
relation to the object, that the world is totally outside, is 
apparent. In this physical world, there seems to be a total 
disconnection of the subject and the object. Things can be 
lost, there can be bereavement, and it is difficult to possess 
anything.  
But as you rise higher and higher in the qualitative 
fields of the upper realms, the relationship between you and 
the world outside becomes more and more intelligible, and 
not material as it is now. Less and less material it will 
become, and the distance that you feel between yourself and 
the world outside will also get narrowed down until you 
reach the highest realm where the object merges into the 
Self, the subject enters into the object, and the divinity 
engulfs both the subjective side and the objective side so 
that there is Universal Experience. This is what the 
Bhagavadgita would like you to understand when it says 
that the higher Self should raise the lower self: uddhared 
ātmanātmānaṁ. 
But never be despondent and melancholy in your 
mood. Do not say, “This is not for me! I am an involved.” 
Everybody is involved in something, but everybody also has 
a prospect in the future. Everybody has some kind of 
understanding of what is happening and how to extricate 
oneself from the entanglement, so-called, of this social and 
material world. Nātmānam avasādayet: Never condemn 
the Self as involved, as a sinner, as bad. There is a divinity 
even in the lowest of selves, but it is buried, and it thinks in 
terms of senses, bodily associations and social conditions.  
152 
 


===== PAGE 153 / 266 =====

Ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ. 
Who is your friend in this world? The higher Self is your 
friend, not somebody sitting outside you. That outside 
person can also become a friend only insofar as that person 
who is apparently outside can be associated livingly, vitally, 
with the adhidaiva consciousness. Otherwise, that outside 
person is an outside person only. You cannot have any real 
friendship with anybody in the world because of the 
independence that each one is maintaining. If the 
independence is slowly mellowed down by its association 
with the higher divinity with which it is connected as the 
adhidaiva, the friendship can be forged. 
The friend of the Self is the self, and also it is the enemy 
of the self. The higher Self is your friend, to the extent your 
lower self is surrendering itself to the higher Self’s demands. 
The higher Self is an enemy—God Himself is the opponent, 
and He will see everything is set at naught with all your 
effort—if this highest Self, which is God Almighty, is not 
put in the proper context of our relation with Him. God-
consciousness, 
divinity-consciousness, 
adhidaiva-
consciousness, higher Self-consciousness mean one and the 
same thing, so you may take it in any sense you like. 
Furthermore, the higher Self is something that is 
immediately above us, which can be experienced as 
becoming the controller of the lower self only if we are able 
to live according to the dictates and the requirements of the 
higher Self. What are the requirements of the higher Self? 
The higher Self is less in need of the senses to acquire any 
kind of satisfaction. The higher Self is less in need of 
association with physical pleasures and social contact. The 
153 
 


===== PAGE 154 / 266 =====

more you feel satisfied with your own self and feel happy 
when you are alone in your room, you may be said to be 
moving in the direction of the true higher Self. But if when 
you are alone you feel miserable and immediately want to 
get out and meet a friend in the marketplace or speak to 
anybody on the way, you are a distracted person.  
Each one can judge one’s own self as far as the progress 
that is made in his spirituality. There are many tests. This is 
one test: Be alone to yourself. For how long can you be 
alone to yourself—for hours and hours, or for some days? If 
you can be alone the whole day, from morning until 
evening—if you do not want to see anybody, and you are 
the happiest man in the world even if you do not look at 
anything—if that is the case, it is a great touchstone of your 
progress. But if you feel miserable after half an hour—the 
legs are aching, the back is not able to straighten itself, and 
the mind says to go out and chat with someone—if this is 
the case, the lower self is controlling you. You are in the 
lower self only, and the higher Self has not taken possession 
of you.  
The higher Self is an integrated consciousness; the 
lower self is dissipated, distracted, conditioned. The higher 
Self is an unconditioned reality; the lower self is a 
conditioned reality. The Self, as I mentioned, is essentially 
consciousness in its nature, and therefore it cannot be 
connected to any object outside. So to the extent the Self, 
which is consciousness, wants to be connected with 
something outside which is not consciousness—objects and 
materials—to that extent the self is not really the Self. It is a 
154 
 


===== PAGE 155 / 266 =====

conditioned, materialised self, contaminated by tamas and 
the gunas of Prakriti. 
Hence, the Gita’s instruction is to raise your lower self 
with the power of the higher Self, aspiring for a larger 
inclusiveness of your personality. Do you not think if your 
dimension of personality increases, you will be happier? If 
you can find yourself in a larger atmosphere, you will see 
that the atmosphere somehow also gets adjusted to you. To 
the extent it is not possible—you seem to be facing a 
difficulty of adjustment of yourself with the outer 
atmosphere—problems will sometimes harass to such an 
extent that they do not seem to be tolerable at all. You do 
not seem to be having any kind of solution to your 
difficulties. Everywhere there are problems, one after the 
other. This is because the lower self is somehow or other 
struggling to get out of its difficulties by its own 
instruments and appurtenances, without resorting to the 
power of the higher Self. 
You should never be despondent and regard yourself as 
incapable. One of the conditions of success in meditation is 
confidence in oneself, not diffidence. You should never sit 
for meditation with the feeling that perhaps nothing will 
come. If you have already decided that, then really nothing 
will come. What you think you are, you really are. Why 
should you be despondent? You should not go to the 
examination hall with the feeling that you are not going to 
succeed. What is the good of going, then? You are going to 
succeed. That is why you take the exam.  
In a similar way, sit for meditation with the feeling that 
tomorrow all shall be well, and all requirements of 
155 
 


===== PAGE 156 / 266 =====

meditation should be at your fingertips. If there is any 
frustration in the mind, emotional disturbance, sorrow that 
is gnawing into your vitals, you should not sit for 
meditation at that time. The lower self, of course, is raised 
by the higher Self, it is true; but if the lower self is in agony, 
if it is sick or diseased, at that time you cannot bring the 
force of impact of the higher Self upon it. The disease has to 
be cured, first of all, as a patient has to follow a certain 
regimentation when treated in a hospital. You do not thrust 
medicine into his body immediately, it is given later on; and 
so the lower self has to be treated. 
Everyone has to judge oneself. A check-up of 
personality is to be maintained with a spiritual diary. It is 
necessary to check up: “How far have I progressed? Are 
there any obstacles which are emotionally disturbing me, or 
am I intellectually in a state of doubt?” Intellectual 
restlessness and emotional tension is instinctive if there are 
frustrations of any kind. Do you want something that you 
cannot get, or are you getting something that you do not 
want? These are the causes of difficulties.  
Many of the difficulties of a spiritual seeker will not be 
visible in the beginning. You may look as though 
everything is all right, that nothing is wrong. You sit for 
meditation. But if you continue to do it for some two or 
three months, you will see that it is not as simple as it 
appeared in the beginning. You will find it very hard. You 
do not know what problems will arise. Nine kinds of 
obstacles are mentioned in Patanjali’s Sutras, and there may 
be more also. 
156 
 


===== PAGE 157 / 266 =====

A sincere, honest and realistic spiritual seeker should 
have a spiritual guide, because after two or three months 
you will find a dark wall in front of you. You cannot pierce 
through it, as it is like a kind of iron curtain. In the 
beginning everything looks fine, but afterwards you will 
find emotions arise, and your physical ailments will slowly 
start showing their heads in all kinds of ways. You are 
unable to eat anything, or you start sneezing, or have neck 
pain. You will say, “It is very difficult. I cannot carry on the 
practice.” This is a symptom which is very expertly 
enunciated in the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, which also gives 
suggestions of how to overcome them gradually. 
So have confidence in yourself, but do not overestimate 
yourself. Do not think that everything is fine with you, 
because you may have some difficulty which is very minor, 
but that minor thing will become like a big mountain when 
it is ignored—like a disease which looks like a very small 
ache but afterwards it will expand itself into agony. That 
should not be allowed. Illness should be nipped in the bud, 
like all problems. 
Hence, the spiritual seeker should, first of all, check up 
his personality, and then see that there are no other desires, 
hankerings or frustrated feelings of any kind. “It would 
have been very good if I had some money in my hand. I am 
a pauper.” If you have this kind of feeling, it is good that 
you have some money. Do not be unnecessarily dejected 
with this sorrow, thinking, “God will give me everything.” 
Maybe God will give you everything, but at the same time 
you have a feeling that you are a pauper. You have double 
feelings, and that should not be. If you want something that 
157 
 


===== PAGE 158 / 266 =====

is permissible, well, have it, but abnormal desires may have 
to be transmuted by the power of suggestions that you 
receive from your Guru. 
Thus, here is something interesting for you in a single 
verse of the Gita: Uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ: raise the self 
by the Self; nātmānam avasādayet: never deprecate 
yourself; ātmaiva hy ātmano bandhur: the Self is the friend 
of the self; ātmaiva ripur ātmanaḥ: the Self is also the 
enemy of the self. The Self is the friend of the self because 
the lower self has surrendered itself completely to the 
requirements of the higher Self. It will certainly take care of 
you. God never ignores any person, provided there is real 
surrender. Otherwise, it will look as if the higher Self is not 
cooperating with you. How will it cooperate with you when 
your self is conditioned by so many physical and social 
associations? Therefore, be brave—vira, as the Upanishad 
puts it. 
Bandhur ātmātmanas tasya yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ, 
anātmanas tu śatrutve vartetātmaiva śatruvat (Gita 6.6). 
These two verses in the beginning of the Sixth Chapter are 
crucial in their meaning. Bandhur ātmātmanas tasya 
yenātmaivātmanā jitaḥ: The Self is the friend of the self of 
that person who has overcome the lower self by the higher 
Self. The Self is the enemy of the self of that person who has 
not been able to overcome the lower self by the higher. 
Here is a concentrated, very valuable instruction for 
spiritual seekers in the art of meditation, put in a little 
capsule. 
The Gita goes further into the art of practical 
meditation, telling you that you are to be seated in a 
158 
 


===== PAGE 159 / 266 =====

particular posture. Śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya sthiram 
āsanam 
ātmanaḥ, 
nātyucchritaṁ 
nātinīcaṁ 
cailājinakuśottaram (Gita 6.11), etc. These are all in the 
scriptures. It is not that you should go away somewhere for 
the purpose of meditation. You can be in your room if that 
is convenient. Otherwise, for atmospheres of this kind you 
can sit in a forest, under a tree where it is cool, not in the 
hot sun, etc. Wherever it is, as is convenient, well ventilated 
by a breeze and not suffocating, be seated calmly and read 
these verses of the Gita, and see to what extent you can raise 
yourself to a higher consciousness. 
The philosophy of the Sankhya evolution that you have 
studied earlier will, to some extent, help you in transferring 
your lower consciousness to a higher one, which is the 
transcendent adhidaiva. You will find it difficult, no doubt. 
That is, you have to be something other than yourself in 
meditation. You cannot continue to be what you are, and 
then be successful in meditating. There is a little bit of 
otherness of yourself in a transcendent sense. If you are 
looking at some object, transfer your consciousness to that 
state which is neither you nor that object. This is also 
suggested in a single sutra of Patanjali where he says you 
become maha videha, or the larger self, by transferring your 
consciousness to another which is not yourself. The 
suggestion is that if you meditate on a tree, for instance, it is 
not enough if you consider the tree as something outside 
you and are looking at it with your sense organs. That is 
sensory perception. It cannot be regarded as meditation on 
the tree. Your consciousness has to get transferred to the 
very existence of that object; you have to think, as it were, 
159 
 


===== PAGE 160 / 266 =====

as the tree thinks; and, much more than that, you have to 
think in terms of that which is between you and the tree, so 
that there is a simultaneous consciousness of what you are 
and what the object outside is. This is suggested in the 
doctrine of the evolution of the universe in terms of the 
adhidaiva connecting subject and object, and also in the 
sutra of Patanjali. 
The Gita’s instruction in regard to meditation is that 
you may be seated on some asana which is neither on the 
ground, nor too high from the ground: nātyucchritaṁ 
nātinīcaṁ. Perhaps the reason is that on the ground itself 
some insects may crawl and trouble you. If it is too high, 
you may fall off the seat—so, neither too high nor too low. 
Something which is supposed to be a non-conductor of 
electricity is spread on the ground. In earlier days, we used 
to have a tiger skin or deerskin, but you can have grass—
kusa grass, a grass mat. It is generally used for meditation. 
On that you have a soft cloth: cailājinakuśottaram. Caila is 
a cloth. Over that you sit.  
That is, all the preparations should be such that they do 
not cause any kind of difficulty for you. They should not be 
painful or distressing in any way. Certain positions that you 
assume in asana, such as padmasana, etc., may be painful. 
You should not struggle to maintain it if you cannot sit in 
that pose for a long time. Whatever is convenient, that is 
the proper pose. Yathābhimata dhyānāt vā (Y.S. 1.39), as 
the Patanjali sutra tells us: As is convenient to you, so is the 
posture that you have. The only thing is, the position that 
you maintain in meditation, though comfortable of course, 
160 
 


===== PAGE 161 / 266 =====

should not cause sleepiness or any kind of pain in the 
joints, etc.; then use any other convenient posture. 
What will you contemplate? What will you think? How 
will the mind operate in this effort at meditation? Usually, 
in the strictly religious sense, it will commence with a 
prayer to God, a prayer to the universe, the Great Father, 
the Supreme Being—whatever be your concept of the 
Supreme Being or the Almighty. In your own language, in 
your own style, offer prayers to this great master of 
creation. “This universe must have been created by 
something; so large is this universe, incomparably vast is 
this creation. How vast the Creator should be! He is 
everywhere in this universe, and also above this universe. 
What glory, what power, what knowledge! Oh, such a Being 
is looking at me, because omniscient is the eye of God. That 
which is immanent in all things, that which is all-pervading, 
is also all-knowing. I am blessed because I am in the 
presence of this all-knowing, powerful Being.”  
In the beginning, feel that energy is flowing through 
you from this Great Lord of the universe. When you sit in 
the Sun, the energy of the Sun enters into you. So is the 
impression that you have to create in your mind. “I am 
slowly drawing strength and energy and prana from the 
cosmos. The cosmic prana is entering into me. Through the 
nostrils it is entering, through every pore of the body it is 
entering. As a magnet pulls things that are near, this Great 
Being is attracting me and pulling me towards it. I am 
inundated by the power that is flowing into me from that 
Great Being. I am stronger today, healthier now, better in 
every way. I have no difficulty, because I am in the presence 
161 
 


===== PAGE 162 / 266 =====

of this all-compassionate, all-powerful, all-knowing God.” 
This is one way in which you can offer your prayers in 
Sanskrit, English, Latin, or in any language. And then place 
yourself mentally, psychologically in the presence of this 
Great Being.  
But you should not think that this is only a kind of 
concoction of your thought. It is not so. This is not an 
imagination; it is a factual and actual operation that is 
taking place. You are not as disconnected from the world as 
you imagine. You are also not as far away from God as you 
may think. There is no distance between you and God, no 
distance at all. The idea of distance arises because of the 
conception of space and time. They are illusions, finally. 
Remove this idea of externality. Your prayers to God will 
certainly reach Him if you believe that God is not even one 
inch distant from you. Thus, picture before yourself your 
concept of God in whatever way your religion, your 
understanding, prescribes it. 
In the earlier stages, it is very hard to even carry on this 
concept of concentration. Have a concrete picture of God 
before you. There are people who keep a picture of Christ, 
Mohammed, Lord Krishna, Devi or Durga, Narayana, 
Vishnu, or Siva. There are people who meditate on the 
Cosmic Being as represented in these forms because there is 
no way to adjust the mind to a total abstraction in the 
beginning itself. Hence, there is a portrait of this Great 
Master. Here is the Great Being portrayed in a particular 
form as an incarnation at least, though not in that Absolute 
form. That incarnation is the pathway for you to enter into 
that which is above the incarnation. 
162 
 


===== PAGE 163 / 266 =====

You will find it difficult even to think it for a long time. 
Even a picture of Krishna, Siva, Devi—how long will you go 
on thinking it? The mind jumps here and there, thinking 
twenty things. So the suggestion is that you have a puja 
room, an altar of worship, and a portrait in front of you. 
Why not open your eyes, gaze at this majestic portrait 
which is painted in such a way that it will please you 
aesthetically, and give you great satisfaction? How beautiful 
it is, how majestic, how powerful, how complete, how 
satisfying! I am one with it, so I become fully satisfied. I 
become completely perfect. I become beautiful. I become 
everything, as that on which I am concentrating is 
everything. Go on looking at it, and at the same time keep 
these ideas of self-fulfilment in the mind. After gazing for a 
few minutes, close the eyes and feel the presence of this 
portrait, this form, in your mind only, without opening the 
eyes. If you feel tired of contemplating like this, open your 
eyes once again and look at the picture. If you feel pain in 
the legs because you have already sat for half an hour, 
straighten your legs or just walk about for a few minutes. 
Then take a deep breath, wash you face with cold water, 
and sit again. The pain will go. 
So this process, this practice of meditating with open 
eyes on a portrait—a form that is concretely there as an 
image such as a statue, a sculptured piece, or a painted 
picture—and then contemplating the same thing with 
closed eyes, may continue. Let it continue like this for one, 
two or three months; then you will find that you no longer 
require any portrait. No picture is necessary. You can close 
your eyes and feel its presence anywhere you want. 
163 
 


===== PAGE 164 / 266 =====

Wherever you sit, you can see that it is this form. 
Contemplate it. The power of your concentration will 
charge this form to such an extent that, after some years of 
practice, perhaps, you will feel the presence of this divinity 
everywhere, as if the whole world is filled with it. If you 
gaze at the sun for a long time and then look this way and 
that way, you will see the sun everywhere because of the 
power of the sun on your eyes; everywhere you will see the 
orb of the sun. In the same way, you will begin to see the 
form of this divinity everywhere on account of the 
concentration which you have been practicing for a long 
time on this particular form. 
As I mentioned sometime back, you must be careful to 
note that this meditation is satisfying, and it should not be 
unsatisfying in any manner. The god whom you have 
chosen for your meditation is all-complete, and you do not 
want anything else in this world. “This god that I am 
meditating upon is all things, and everything will come to 
me from that god.” Faith is necessary. Do not doubt. If 
there is mere concentration through the will with lack of 
faith—with doubt that it may come or it may not come—
then no, nothing will happen. Let this faith be there that it 
will certainly come.  
The world is a single organic completeness and living 
whole, 
and 
therefore 
everything 
is 
touching 
you 
everywhere. God is touching you. You are on the lap of 
God, as it were. Faith is very important; without it, nothing 
will work. Mere intellectual study is no good because there 
are doubts, eventually. But if the faith says it will work, let 
the intellect say whatever it likes, but it will certainly work. 
164 
 


===== PAGE 165 / 266 =====

There is nothing, no wonder that faith cannot work. It is a 
miracle worker. Such is faith. 
With this kind of practice for a long time, you will see 
the divinity present everywhere. You will feel divine energy 
flowing into you from all sides, and an immense 
satisfaction that you cannot feel otherwise by the possession 
of anything in this world. 
The Bhagavadgita gives a brief instruction on how you 
can conduct meditation; in a few verses, it says 
incomparable bliss will arise from your own self. Yasmin 
sthito na duḥkhena guruṇāpi vicālyate (Gita 6.22): In that 
condition established, rooted in that satisfaction, that joy, 
that arises from one’s own self by non-contamination with 
external things, even the heaviest sorrow of the world 
cannot shake a person. The heaviest sorrow of things will 
not touch you because of the incomparable joy that you feel 
from yourself on account of the release of the tensions of 
the self and the uncontaminated Self rising to the surface of 
its action and flooding you so that you become the whole 
Self, as if the whole body has become the Self. 
Now the Self looks like it is something inside the body, 
inside the mind, inside the intellect, inside what you are, 
but it will be everything afterwards. There will be 
scintillating light everywhere. Everything will shine. 
Materiality will assume spirituality, objectivity will become 
subjectivity, and both the subject and the object will assume 
a sense of universality. 
Great difficulty is there. Arjuna, hearing all this great 
instruction, said, “Lord, it is wonderful! Is it possible to 
achieve this state in this life? Life is short, time is fleeting; 
165 
 


===== PAGE 166 / 266 =====

how long are we going to live in this world? Maybe for a 
few years. In these few years, will I be able to attain to this 
supreme state of bliss that you have been describing as the 
consequence of this meditation on the Self?” Suppose the 
person dies in the middle, before achieving anything 
palpable in meditation. What is the state of that person in 
the next birth? 
No problem! Great consolation comes from the Master. 
Even a little good effort in this world in the right direction 
will pay its dividend. Even a minute of thought of God 
correctly, properly, with faith, from the bottom of your 
heart, will not be a waste. You should not say it is only one 
minute. Let it be only one minute; that minute will come to 
your aid one day or the other. There is no loss of effort in 
this practice of Yoga. Every little thing that you do is a 
virtue because even a half step that you take in the direction 
of the achievement of this great goal is a great credit for 
your life. 
Therefore, do not be under the impression that in case 
the body drops in the middle of Yoga nothing will come, 
that everything is gone. No. This practice will be ushered 
forward by the very force and the impulse and the 
momentum of the practice that you have carried on in your 
previous life. Very early in age you will suddenly rise up 
into the memory of the need to practice Yoga. Are there not 
children who, at the very early age of four or five years, are 
religious and good-natured? From where does this idea of 
goodness and religiousness arise in small children? It is the 
samskara of their previous performances, some karmas of 
good deeds they did, etc. 
166 
 


===== PAGE 167 / 266 =====

Hence, a Yogi who is not in a position to achieve the 
highest goal and departs from this world in the middle of 
the practice will be reborn in such conditions where it will 
be possible to continue the practice from the point where 
he left it in the previous birth. So there is no loss of effort. 
You may be born as the progeny of some great master, a 
great Yogi’s son, or you may be born with such affluence, 
such facility and such comfort and freedom from difficulty 
that you will be able to carry on your practice there without 
any kind of hindrance from outside. Either you will be able 
to carry on the practice by yourself because you have 
automatically been placed under suitable conditions by the 
fact of your birth, or you will be the son or the daughter of a 
great master. That is a great blessedness, very difficult to 
achieve: labhate paurvadehikam, yatate ca tato bhūyaḥ 
(Gita 6.43). Do not expect to be a child of a great master so 
easily like that. You must be a most blessed soul to have 
such a birth in the next realm. But there is no loss. 
So even if the body is dropped and death takes place in 
the middle of the practice, there is nothing to grieve. Be 
happy under any circumstance. All is well in this world 
which is created by God. “All is well. Everything is fine, and 
I shall attain the goal.” With this faith, carry on the practice. 
God bless you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
167 
 


===== PAGE 168 / 266 =====

Chapter 10 
THE HIDDEN MEANING OF THE SEVENTH 
CHAPTER OF THE GITA 
The first six chapters of the Bhagavadgita stand by 
themselves as unique teachings on the integration of the 
human personality, which process was described gradually 
right from the First Chapter. The Gita, as a very good 
psychologist and a master teacher to students, takes its 
stand on the level of the student, and endeavours to 
gradually raise the mind of the student from that pedestal 
on which the student stands. Though the student is Arjuna 
in this particular context, the student is every one of us, 
humanity in general. 
Arjuna finds himself in a highly non-aligned and 
disturbed circumstance of conflict of every kind, with 
difficulties galore. This is described in the First Chapter; 
and you know how the mind was gradually raised to higher 
and higher levels by the theoretical teaching of the Sankhya 
cosmological doctrine and by the practical teaching of the 
implementation of this Sankhya doctrine in the actual 
performance in life, called Yoga. A further confidence was 
infused into the mind of the student-disciple in the Fourth 
Chapter when it is told that God Himself incarnates as the 
rectifying medium whenever any critical situation arises; 
and in the Sixth Chapter we were told how it is possible to 
align the layers of our personality in an integrated act of 
meditation. 
So up to this time, until the end of the Sixth Chapter, 
the emphasis is on the human individual, the perfection of 
168 
 


===== PAGE 169 / 266 =====

man, the bringing together of all the forces that constitute 
individuality, as a soldier is worked up into perfection and 
order for the action that he has to embark upon in a field of 
battle. In every way he has to be prepared. He girds up his 
loins, as they say, but not in an unprepared manner. In 
every way he is prepared. At one whistle or one stroke, he is 
ready to strike with all his might and main. But on what 
will he strike? This is another subject altogether which will 
take us to the chapters from the Seventh onwards, right up 
to the Eleventh—which form another unit, with which we 
can club the Twelfth Chapter also as an appendix thereof. 
While the human individuality is to be perfected by 
integration, alignment of layers through the constituents of 
the meditational process, the human individual is also to be 
aligned to a cosmic setup—a macrocosmic integration, as it 
is called. The microcosmic endeavour of the human 
personality has to be set in perfect tune with the 
macrocosmic order, law and system, so that gaining 
individual perfection is only a preparatory process for its 
perfect alignment with the cosmic perfection. So there is an 
element of cosmology and macrocosmic operation even in 
the act of meditation, and it is not an isolated individual 
effort. 
Therefore, it is now clear that when you sit for 
meditation, you are preparing for some onslaught, and it is 
not an end in itself. Meditation, dhyana, leads to samadhi, 
communion with reality. The nature of reality has not been 
properly touched upon in the chapters that we have 
covered up to this time. There was excessive emphasis on 
the nature of the psychological individual, but the 
169 
 


===== PAGE 170 / 266 =====

metaphysical cosmos has not been explained in sufficient 
detail, except here and there by way of vague reference. 
When we were discussing the Sankhya doctrine of the 
Second Chapter, we had occasion to digress into the details 
of Sankhya cosmology. This detail is not to be found in the 
Second Chapter; only the word ‘Sankhya’ is used, and it is 
said that Sankhya is essential. Arjuna was lacking 
knowledge of Sankhya, on account of which he could not 
be an expert in the Yoga of action. But it is good to have at 
least some idea of the outline of the entire process of cosmic 
creation, which you remember as it has been told to you. 
Now the Gita takes up this very subject in the Seventh 
and Eighth Chapters, etc.—the cosmic evolutionary 
process, the structure of the universe. The description of 
this reality of the universe becomes necessary for the 
purpose of enlightening the individual already perfected 
through the first six chapters for direct communion with 
the cosmic whole.  
Bhūmir āponalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, 
ahaṁkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā (Gita 7.4). In 
our description of the Sankhya cosmology, we noted there 
is Purusha, Prakriti, Mahat, Ahamkara, and a threefold 
distribution of force into the adhyatma, the adhibhuta, and 
the adhidaiva which is between; the adhibhuta was 
constituted of the elements, or tanmatras, called shabda, 
sparsha, rupa, rasa, gandha, and the elements prithvi, jala, 
tejo, vayu, akash—earth, water, fire, air and ether.  
This verse of the Gita says: bhūmir āponalo vāyuḥ 
khaṁ. Bhumi is the earth, apa is water, anala is fire, vayu is 
air, kham is akasha. These five elements are mentioned 
170 
 


===== PAGE 171 / 266 =====

here as evolutes from the Supreme Being. Then added to it 
is mano buddhi ahamkara. They refer to or correspond to 
ahamkara through the Sankhya system, as mentioned to 
you, and there is the Mahat, there is the Mulaprakriti. They 
are almost similar to these three principles mano buddhi 
ahamkara, which are above the five elements. These are the 
eight principles. Bhūmir āponalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano 
buddhir eva ca, ahaṁkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir 
aṣṭadhā: This is My eightfold manipulative power, Prakriti, 
the operative force. 
But there is something above them. That is the Supreme 
Purusha. Apareyam itas tvanyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me 
parām, jīvabhūtāṁ mahābāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat 
(Gita 7.5). This eightfold Prakriti mentioned is like a roster. 
Right from Prakriti downwards—through the series of 
Mahat, ahamkara,the five tanmatras and the five 
mahabhutas—may be considered as lower categories of 
creation, but the vitality, the force, the prana, the energy, 
the life, the consciousness that is behind these elements is 
something different, which is the life principle operating in 
all, which is God Himself. Jīvabhūtāṁ: There is life, 
purposiveness, longing, desire, restlessness, aspiration in 
everything. In dead matter you cannot find all these 
activities. 
Etadyonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇīty upadhāraya (Gita 7.6). 
The whole creation is only this much: this operative 
principle which is consciousness, jiva, and the other 
eightfold categorisations of Prakriti. Ahaṁ kṛtsnasya 
jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā (Gita 7.6). Here Sri 
Krishna sums up all his teaching by saying, “I am 
171 
 


===== PAGE 172 / 266 =====

everything.” This statement has not been made in the Gita 
up to this time. “I am the beginning and the end of all 
things.” Who is saying this? Only whoever is the beginning 
and the end of all things can say that. No individual, no 
particular manifestation can speak in this extreme. 
Kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas: I am the beginning, 
the middle and the end—all the universe, in its entirety. 
That is to say, this peculiar ‘I’ which is making this 
statement is immanent, is hidden as the soul of all things 
throughout the process of creation. There are innumerable 
evolutes, but through every process of evolution, and in 
every evolute that is so manifested, the life principle 
continuously is present as there is a single consciousness 
continuously operating in the three states of our life—
waking, dream and sleep. Waking is different from dream, 
dream is different from sleep. They are totally different in 
their character. When you are dreaming, you cannot know 
that there is any such thing as the waking condition; when 
you are awake, you do not think of the dream condition at 
all; and when you are asleep, the other two conditions 
vanish. It is not possible to distinguish these three states 
unless there is a continuous consciousness permeating all 
three. Therefore, you know, “I am awake, I had a dream, 
and I slept.” It is one ‘I’ that is speaking, knowing at the 
same time that all the three states are of one particular 
entity only. 
In a similar manner, the whole of creation is ‘I’, says the 
Universal Consciousness. Here we may identify this great ‘I’ 
with the Purusha of the Sankhya—infinite in its nature. 
Only the Infinite can say, “I am everything.” This 
172 
 


===== PAGE 173 / 266 =====

identification of the Supreme I in the process of creation 
and all the evolutes causes various difficulties in 
understanding from the point of view of an ordinary 
individual. We cannot actually understand in what manner 
God pervades the world and in what way creation is 
effected. We have to take it for granted that it is exactly as it 
has been described in the scriptures. If you wrack your head 
too much, you will find no answer because the action of the 
macrocosm, the workings of the Infinite, cannot be 
comprehended by the faculties available to the individual.  
There is a story associated with St. Augustine, a 
theologian and a mystic of the Middle Ages, a very famous 
doctrinaire of Christian theology. It appears he was sitting 
on the shore of the ocean, trying to find out how creation 
arose. He had to write a thesis, a big book on theology, 
which should also mention the process of how God actually 
manufactured this universe. From what material did He 
create this? How did He think? How did His will operate 
when creation took place? He was deeply brooding over it. 
The story goes that a boy suddenly appeared near him, and 
was bailing out water from the ocean and throwing it on 
the sand. The pot was full of holes and the water ran out the 
holes, but still he was trying to empty the ocean, as it were. 
St. Augustine said, “My dear boy, what are you doing?” “I 
am emptying the ocean.” “What kind of person are you? 
You cannot empty the ocean with this pot, especially as it 
has holes.” 
The boy replied, “If you can get an answer to what you 
are thinking in your mind, I can empty the ocean.” It 
means to say, you can never get an answer to this question. 
173 
 


===== PAGE 174 / 266 =====

Every answer is tentative. It is satisfying so far as our 
understanding of the cosmos is concerned, but our 
understanding is our understanding; that’s all. It has to be 
locked up in our cabin; it cannot go outside. It helps us to 
some extent as a walking stick, but the walking stick cannot 
walk. It only helps us.  
So all our knowledge is a kind of walking stick. It has 
the power to give us some assistance like a torch when we 
are walking in darkness, but it cannot suffice in the end. 
Nobody can understand the great mystery of this form that 
we have seen just now. No tapas, no austerity, no effort of 
any kind even in the spiritual field can make us fit to behold 
this form. This is what that Cosmic Form spoke to Arjuna 
in the Eleventh Chapter. Our efforts are of no avail. A 
superior, different kind of effort may be necessary to behold 
that Form—not through the physical eyes, but through an 
eye which is different altogether.  
Ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā. 
Briefly, the cosmological statement is here in these three 
verses. It will be touched upon again in two verses in the 
Third Chapter. But the point is that it is an affirmation of 
the same detail covered earlier, that the Supreme Absolute, 
God Almighty—you may call Him Parabrahman, Purusha, 
Purushottama—is everything. This is the doctrine of the 
Vedanta which distinguishes itself from the Sankhya to 
some extent, especially from what is called the graphical 
Sankhya. According to the Sankhya, the Purusha and the 
Prakriti are totally different entities; both are realities by 
themselves. Though the Sankhya says that the Purusha does 
not pervade Prakriti, yet it says that Purusha is all-in-all and 
174 
 


===== PAGE 175 / 266 =====

infinite. Infinite are the Purushas, numberless are they, and 
yet each one is infinite. This is a peculiar logic of the 
Sankhya which has been transcended by the universal 
philosophy of the Vedanta where Prakriti does not stand as 
a contradiction to Purusha; it is not an object of 
consciousness, it is a manifestation of the Infinite itself. 
Otherwise, Purusha cannot make the statement “I am all”, 
because the Purusha of the Sankhya is all in the sense of its 
being infinite, but it is not all in the sense that there is a 
Prakriti in front of it always. 
Hence, the Vedanta doctrine is adumbrated here, in 
addition to the acceptance of the principles of the Sankhya. 
The Vedanta takes the whole philosophy of the Sankhya 
with a pinch of salt, and accepts it with some reservation. 
The evolutionary process described by the Sankhya is 
perfectly all right; the Vedanta accepts it. Yet there is a ‘but’ 
before it, that the Purusha is not infinite in number. There 
is only one Purusha possible because there cannot be two 
infinities. Infinity is one only. Even if you try to pile up 
infinities over infinities, you will have one infinity only.  
Therefore, there can be only one ‘I’ behind the cosmos, 
not many I’s. Many I’s cannot say, “We are the creators of 
the cosmos and we are all things,” because two things 
cannot be all things. So here is the supremacy of the 
Godhood that speaks in this strain as ‘I’: “I am.” That is all. 
You cannot say anything more. You can only say, “it is.” 
Astīti bruvato’nyatra kathaṁ tad upalabhyate (Katha 12), 
as the Upanishad says. You can know God as Existence. It 
is, that’s all. You should not say anything more about God 
except that He is. What He is, you should not say, because 
175 
 


===== PAGE 176 / 266 =====

there is no quality, no attribute that can be associated with 
Him, inasmuch as He is the All. If He is the All, there can 
be no external attribute. Ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ 
prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā: I am all things. 
It is incumbent on the part of the spiritual seeker, as 
mentioned, to commune himself with this great Reality 
which is the beginning and the end of all things. The 
Universal should engulf, as it were, the individual. The 
waves should subside in the ocean. The little I of the finite 
individual should get merged in the Infinite One I. 
The feeling of the seeker of Truth at the time of his 
attempt to commune himself with the Almighty is called 
bhakti or devotion in the language of the Gita. Whoever is 
devoted to God is also a Yogi. In all practices there is an 
element of devotion, a longing for something higher than 
one’s own self. You are a devotee of the higher Self. You are 
a devotee of God. You are a devotee of the infinite Purusha. 
You are devoted to it in the sense that you want it. 
Whenever you want something, you become a devotee of 
that thing. 
The Gita tells us that there are varieties of devotees. 
Your devotion to God is not a uniform attitude commonly 
discoverable in everybody at the same time. You are placed 
in a different context on account of your karmas and the 
nature of your personality. Even when you love or hate a 
thing, you differ from another person who has a love and 
hate for different things. The quality or intensity of love 
and hatred varies in different individuals according to the 
nature of the object as they conceive it or according to their 
own psychological circumstance. 
176 
 


===== PAGE 177 / 266 =====

Caturvidhā bhajante māṁ janāḥ sukṛtinorjuna, ārto 
jijñāsur arthārthī jñānī ca bharatarṣabha (Gita 7.16). The 
Bhagavadgita distinguishes four kinds of devotees. Many 
people run to God, offer prayers to God every day, but for 
what is this prayer? What do you want from God? There 
are people who want something from God. If you want 
nothing, you will not approach anything. People are 
distressed in life. There is great sorrow, poverty, ignorance, 
disease, tension, conflict, and what not. They cry, “God, 
come and help me.” These devotees who cry for help from 
God because they are in a state of distress are called arthas, 
distressed devotees. They want nothing else from God 
except freedom from distress. Sorrow and pain must be 
removed; that is all they expect from God. Inasmuch as the 
expectation is so small, it may even look silly to ask God 
Almighty for that. But yet, many devotees are of that type, 
and the Almighty incarnated as Bhagavan Sri Krishna says, 
“They are also beloved. They are devoted to me.” 
But there are other devotees who do not seek this kind 
of blessing. They say, “Give me wisdom, knowledge, 
enlightenment.” For instance, Panini did meditation on 
Lord Siva for wisdom, and Lord Siva appeared before him, 
and with the sound of his damaru gave him knowledge of 
all Sanskrit literature. The scriptures contain many 
examples of these kinds of devotees. “I am ignorant. I 
understand nothing. Please bless me with knowledge.” 
These are a higher kind of devotees—jijnasu, they are 
called. One who wants to know is a jijnasu. One who wants 
to be free from distress is an artha. So artha and jijnasu are 
the first two categories.  
177 
 


===== PAGE 178 / 266 =====

Artharthi is the third type—one who wants material 
prosperity. “I would like to be materially rich, socially 
highly placed. I would like to be even a king, if God is so 
pleased. Lord, condescend to make me an emperor of this 
world.” And God will make you an emperor. If not in this 
world, in the next birth at least you will be born as the son 
of an emperor. You may be a ruler of a large kingdom. God 
is not unable to grant even this wish.  
This is one interpretation of the word ‘artha’ according 
to certain commentators of the Gita. Artha is material, an 
object, prosperity which is visible, tangible, connected with 
this world, this earth. But certain other commentators say it 
is not necessary for us to confine the meaning of this word 
artha only to material prosperity. There may be some other 
meaning also, inasmuch as there seems to be a gradation of 
ascent in the order of renunciation of the devotees, finally 
consummating in jnani, or the highest devotee. If the 
jijnasu, or the disciple of knowledge, is to be considered 
superior to the one who asks only for freedom from 
distress, and you are actually being taken to the highest 
level of the jnani state, the third type should not be 
something less than the second because the one who asks 
for material gains cannot be regarded as superior to the one 
who asks for knowledge. So perhaps the intention of the 
Lord may be a little different from the meaning that we are 
trying to associate with the word artha. Maybe it is 
prosperity; there is nothing wrong with it. Perhaps it is 
purushartha. Purushartha means the aims of existence. 
The objectives of life are fourfold in number—dharma, 
artha, kama, moksha, as they are called. One who is asking 
178 
 


===== PAGE 179 / 266 =====

for perfection in the acquisition of these great values of life 
should be considered as superior even to the one who asks 
for knowledge in a general sense. Material, emotional and 
ethical values consummating in the wisdom of the Supreme 
Being constitute the four aims of life. They are called 
purushartha. So artha here may also mean purushartha; in 
that sense, the gradation of ascent is maintained. Thus, the 
third category of devotees is this, the artharthi. The first is 
artha, the second is jijnasu, the third is artharthi. But the 
highest, according to the Lord, is jnana. All these three just 
mentioned expect something from God. The whole point is 
this. But what does the jnani expect? He expects only God. 
He wants nothing from God. The giver of the gift is 
certainly greater than the gift. Why should you not ask for 
the one who gives the gift, instead of only the gift? Would 
that not be wisdom on your part? I want you only, and not 
anything that you give, because whatever you can give is 
inside you, included in you. It is part and parcel of your 
being. 
In the Mahabharata, Duryodhana and Arjuna went to 
Dvarka to seek help from Sri Krishna in the war that was to 
ensue, and asked for assistance from this master, Sri 
Krishna. Krishna asked, “What do you want from me? 
There are only two things with me: I myself, a single 
individual; and I have a large army. Now you can choose. 
Either you choose the large army which is almost 
invincible, or you choose me. But I am an individual, a 
single person. The army can fight, but I am not going to 
fight. I have decided not to take up arms. I will only be 
sitting with you and talking to you as a friend. If you like, 
179 
 


===== PAGE 180 / 266 =====

you can keep me there with you, but you can expect 
nothing from me. If you want me sitting there idle, doing 
nothing, take me; otherwise, if you want the army, take the 
army.” 
Duryodhana was a wise man. Why should he take the 
idle man? He took the army. Wonderful! He went home 
and declared to his cousins, his brothers and kinsmen, “We 
have already won the war even before it has taken place. I 
have an invincible army which Lord Krishna has given me.” 
After he departed, Arjuna was standing there still, and 
Krishna said, “Foolish man! What made you choose me 
when I can do nothing for you?” Arjuna, with tears in his 
eyes, said, “Thou shalt not speak thus. Don’t say this to me. 
I know you are everything. Even your presence is sufficient 
for me. You need not do anything. You just be. I shall be 
blessed.” 
Arjuna knew the power of Sri Krishna and his ability, 
which did not consist in his actions, but consisted in his 
being. The sun does not act with hands and feet; the very 
existence of the sun is the activity of the sun. The very 
existence of God is the activity of God. The millions of 
soldiers that Duryodhana took were like drops, though they 
were millions in number. But Sri Krishna was an ocean 
which can swallow all the drops, though it was one. 
Numerical computation does not work here because the 
one is greater than the millions. 
So the jnani expects nothing from God. “I want to be 
free from distress; I want to be relieved of pain; I want 
knowledge; give me this, give me that – no! I want you,” as 
Arjuna said. Udārāḥ sarva evaite (Gita 7.18): I am pleased 
180 
 


===== PAGE 181 / 266 =====

with all these devotees. The greatness of God also consists 
in His kindness, mercy, motherly feeling. The Almighty is 
not merely a judiciary in the cosmos. He will not smile 
before a client. But here is a mother and a tender caretaker 
of the littlest of babies. “Even a crawling, insect-like devotee 
is dear to Me because he wants Me. Let him want Me in his 
own way.” 
It is said in the Ramayana—it is not in written books, 
but the story is told—that when Rama built a bridge, big 
monkeys were lifting huge loads of stones and throwing 
them on the bridge to complete it quickly, and there was a 
squirrel that also wanted to be of assistance to Rama. What 
could the squirrel do? It could not carry stones. It was so 
devoted and thrilled with the prospect of being of some 
service to this great master, it rolled on the sand and shook 
whatever sand that stuck to its fur onto the bridge, with the 
sincere feeling that it was also adding some material, some 
sand particles, towards the bridge’s construction. 
Now, service is actually not what you give, but how you 
give it. Charity is not the material that is offered but the 
manner in which it is offered—the intention and feeling 
behind it. Your heart is what is charitable, not your external 
faculties. Your tenderness of feeling when you give 
something, even if it is a hard thing to do, is a charity; but if 
you give millions in a disgruntled manner, it is not charity. 
Rama, it seems, was so thrilled with this little squirrel, 
much more than he was with Hanuman and the monkeys, 
that he caught hold of it and passed his fingers over its back 
in great compassion. People say that the three white lines 
that you see on the back of a squirrel are due to the three 
181 
 


===== PAGE 182 / 266 =====

fingers that Rama passed on its back. This is the belief of 
devotees. 
Udārāḥ sarva evaite: All are dear to Me; there is no 
partiality on My side. Yet, he adds one proviso. Jñānī tv 
ātmaiva me matam: All the devotees are dear to Me, but I 
cannot say the jnani is dear to Me; he is Me. Here is the 
difference between a jnani and a devotee, though the jnani 
can also be regarded as a devotee in the highest order in the 
sense that he wants that which can give everything. 
Udārāḥ sarva evaite jñānī tv ātmaiva me matam, 
āsthitaḥ sa hi yuktātmā mām evānuttamāṁ gatim  (Gita 
7.18). Why do I consider the jnani as the highest of beings? 
Because he does not exist at all apart from Me. The other 
devotees exist as recipients of the bounties and abundances 
that they expect from Me. The jnani does not exist at all. He 
has vanished into thin air and become Me, so he stands as 
the I of the Supreme Lord. 
With this description of the devotees and the nature of 
the jnani, Bhagavan Sri Krishna gives the secret of how you 
have to adapt yourself to God’s outlook of life. The reason 
why the Supreme Form, the Universal Form, said that 
nobody can behold this except under special conditions is 
because of the fact the outlook of that Almighty is not 
always possible for anybody else to adopt. If you can think 
like God, feel like God, work like God, and have attitudes to 
things as perhaps God has, that would be a fitness on your 
part. But who on earth can think like God? We do not even 
know how He will think and what He expects us to think. 
The difficulty in envisioning the very structure of God’s 
consciousness makes it hard for us to become really fit for 
182 
 


===== PAGE 183 / 266 =====

that vision unless, with His mercy and compassion, He 
thrusts His own outlook on our head, as perhaps He did in 
the case of Arjuna. Arjuna had to be perforce made a good 
disciple by shakti pada, as it is called, a forceful entry of the 
Guru, the Lord Himself, into the mind of the disciple.  
Jarāmaraṇamokṣāya mām āśritya yatanti ye, te brahma 
tad viduḥkṛtsnam adhyātmaṁkarma cākhilam (Gita 7.29); 
sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ, 
prayāṇakālepi ca māṁte vidur yuktacetasaḥ (Gita 7.30). 
Who is a jnani? He who contemplates the Almighty as 
identical with his own self. As I mentioned, there cannot be 
two selves, or so many Purushas. The Atman cannot be 
manifold because if there are many Atmans, there will be a 
contradiction of one subject having an attitude of any kind 
with another subject because the other subject will become 
an object, so another subject cannot be there. There can be 
only one subject. That subjectness of a universal nature is 
the object so-called of the contemplation of the jnani. Even 
at the time of passing from this world—even when you are 
dying—if you can manage to centre your consciousness in 
this great concept, you shall not be reborn. There will be no 
rebirth. You shall attain salvation, and enter into God. 
Jarāmaraṇamokṣāya: for the sake of freedom from old 
age and the sufferings of life; mām āśritya yatanti ye: 
whoever resorts to me for this purpose. Te brahma tad 
iduḥkṛtsnam: They know the Absolute in its integrality, and 
also its manifestations as adhyatma, adhibhuta, adhidaiva. 
Te brahma tad viduḥkṛtsnam adhyātmaṁkarma cākhilam: 
all things.  
183 
 


===== PAGE 184 / 266 =====

Sādhibhūtādhidaivaṁ māṁ sādhiyajñaṁ ca ye viduḥ, 
prayāṇakālepi ca māṁte: The compassion of God is 
infinite. You would certainly expect to be devoted to Him 
throughout your life, not treating Him only as a second-
hand or third-hand item which you can think of sometime 
later at leisure. But even then, it is good. “Even if you forget 
Me throughout your life but at least remember Me when 
you are dying, I shall be pleased with you.” This is great 
kindness indeed! You have forgotten your friend for your 
whole life, and only for one moment when you want 
something from him you are calling him and saying, 
“Hello, how are you?” Such a friend you cannot find in this 
world. He will say, “You never thought of me. Now you 
want me to come and help.” But God is not a man. He is 
not selfish. He does not expect anything from you. He does 
not love you because you love Him; He loves you because 
He is you. So even at the time of passing if you can 
maintain this consciousness of the divinity, of the 
adhyatma, adhidaiva, adhibhuta and the Supreme Absolute 
Brahma as operative in this universe of activity which is 
called adhiyajna, then yuktacetasah: such united beings 
know Reality in fact. 
Very great is the hidden meaning of this Seventh 
Chapter. I have gone through it very rapidly, giving you 
only the essence of it in different places. The cosmological, 
theological and spiritual secrets of the Gita you will find in 
a seed form in the Seventh Chapter. With this, we now 
proceed to the Eighth Chapter for a different view 
altogether of what has already been said. 
 
184 
 


===== PAGE 185 / 266 =====

Chapter 11 
BEHOLDING GOD AS HE BEHOLDS HIMSELF 
So the Eighth Chapter is quintessentially an answer 
which the Lord gives to the questions of Arjuna, which 
briefly I placed before you, that you can read in greater 
detail in commentaries of the Bhagavadgita. Highly 
elevated expressions of the religious consciousness are 
found in the Ninth Chapter. From the Seventh Chapter 
onwards, as I mentioned, the religious consciousness 
becomes more and more intensified until it reaches the 
pinnacle or the apotheosis in the Eleventh Chapter. In the 
earlier stages, say from the Seventh Chapter onwards until 
we come to the Ninth, God is always placed on a pedestal of 
superiority in the heavenly world, as it were. God is a 
transcendent being, and He seems to be very far from us. 
He is the creator of the cosmos; therefore, He is above 
creation, and above us also. So we can imagine the distance 
between ourselves and God: God is so far, He may take 
time to reach us. These ideas may also enter our minds 
because of the psychological distance created by us due to 
the conception of God being the creator of the cosmos and 
the cosmos being so vast. 
Here in the Eighth Chapter, during the enunciation of 
the possibility of the soul attaining God after death, the 
point is that you will reach God only after death, and not 
when you are alive. This also keeps God at a distance, 
especially in your practical life. But it is in the Ninth 
Chapter that God comes down to your level. There is a 
diminution of the distance between God and man as the 
185 
 


===== PAGE 186 / 266 =====

Gita proceeds higher and higher, from the Seventh Chapter 
onwards. God is a transcendent creative principle, the judge 
of the cosmos, very far from you; you cannot see Him. This 
idea may enter into you when you reach the Seventh 
Chapter, where it briefly touches upon the creative process. 
Even this idea of liberation being possible only after death, 
and that nothing is possible in this life, may enter into you 
when you reach the Eighth Chapter. 
But in the Ninth Chapter it says God is your friend. You 
cannot expect a friend to be millions of light-years away. 
He is very near you. He is a comrade and a well-wisher. He 
is your bosom friend, alter ego, and He is at your service, as 
it were, whenever you need Him. In a pendent verse of the 
Ninth Chapter, a masterstroke is struck in enunciating the 
meaning of the religious consciousness when it is told that 
God provides every need of the human being. Ananyāś 
cintayanto 
māṁ 
ye 
janāḥ 
paryupāsate, 
teṣāṁ 
nityābhiyuktānāṁ yogakṣemaṁ vahāmy aham (Gita 9.22). 
The great promise is made by God: “Whoever contemplates 
Me undividedly without any other thought in the mind, 
absorbing the mind in the thought of God only, such a 
person will lack nothing.” Everything is at your fingertips. 
All commodities will be thrown at you. 
I heard an interesting story about this. There was a 
Brahmin priest who was very fond of this verse. He said, 
“Oh, I have no problem now. I am a devotee of God. God 
has promised. See the promise: ‘Whenever you think of Me 
undividedly, I shall be at your service, and all your needs 
will be supplied to you.’ When the demand comes, the 
supply also comes.” He was a poor fellow. He was living on 
186 
 


===== PAGE 187 / 266 =====

alms, begging, and every day he would go from house to 
house and collect a little rice and some grains, and maintain 
his wife and children. Yet he was satisfied. “After all, God is 
kind to me. He has given me all that I want. What do I 
want, except a little food that He has given me in the form 
of alms?” Even with that wretched life, he was satisfied. He 
attributed it to the grace of God.  
But one day it so happened, alms would not come. He 
went all places; nobody gave anything. He came back in the 
evening and said, “I have got nothing.” His children were 
crying. They were starving. They said, “Papa, give us some 
food.” But what food? There was no food. The mother also 
said, “Okay, all right.” The next day also this happened. It 
was terrible. He came back with nothing in the evening of 
the third day also, and they were dying, that’s all. 
Starvation. He got annoyed. “This promise is not a real 
promise! I thought God is kind and He would keep His 
promise, but He has not.” In those days, scriptures were 
written on palm leaves. In anger he took a nail and struck 
that verse, tearing it. “We are dying in spite of our prayer to 
God.” He threw it down, and ran from the house. He did 
not want to sit there and hear the cry of his little children, 
who were almost dying.  
After a few minutes of the departure of this old man in 
wrath, some boy suddenly came with a big bag on his back, 
threw it on the veranda of the house and yelled to the 
mother, “Here are the rations for you.” She came out. He 
was bleeding from the tongue. She asked, “What is the 
matter?” “Your husband has sent all these grains.” “Why 
are you bleeding?” “Oh, I came a little late. He was so angry 
187 
 


===== PAGE 188 / 266 =====

with me, he cut my tongue,” he said. “Oh what an idiot! He 
is so bad. How can he tear your tongue like that? Poor boy!” 
She cursed her husband. The boy vanished.  
After some time the Brahmin came home, and she said, 
“Are you a fool? Have you no sense? You sent some grains, 
rice and dahl, etc., with a boy, and you tore his tongue 
because he was a little late.” He was flabbergasted. He said, 
“I have not sent any grain. I have not seen any boy. I have 
not torn the tongue of any person.” “But I saw him. Here 
are the grains,” said the mother. The old man closed his 
eyes for a few minutes and understood what it could be. He 
wept. And it appears he actually touched the feet of his 
wife, saying, “You are more blessed than I because you had 
darshan of God Himself.” Well, this is the story of this great 
verse: ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate, 
teṣāṁ nityā-bhiyuktānāṁ yogakṣemaṁ vahāmy aham. 
God is at your beck and call, as it were. 
In certain instances of the lives of saints, in 
Maharashtra especially, we have anecdotes of someone 
suddenly coming in the nick of time and working as a 
servant boy of the particular saint. The Divine Will itself 
manifested in the case of Eknath or Namdev in the form of 
a little working boy called Sri Kandiya. All the miracles of 
this world are the workings of God only. If you have the 
blessing of a cup of tea in the morning, you must remember 
that God has willed it; otherwise, you would not get it. You 
would not get even a cup of milk or tea if God has not 
willed it. You should not imagine that you have money in 
your pocket, and therefore you purchased it. You will not 
have any money in the pocket, and you cannot purchase 
188 
 


===== PAGE 189 / 266 =====

anything like that; you cannot even lift your finger unless 
the Central Will operates, let alone anything else. 
Such consoling message of the nearness of God, 
friendship of God, readiness of God to be of assistance to 
you at any moment is delineated in the Ninth Chapter, 
whose details we cannot entertain just now due to the 
paucity of time. I am moving rapidly, as I mentioned to 
you, to complete the whole Gita, and you can read 
commentaries to know what the substance of the Ninth 
Chapter is. 
In the Tenth Chapter, God comes nearer. He is not 
merely ready to come to you whenever you want; He is 
already there all around you in some form or the other, in 
excellences of all types. Yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ śrīmad 
ūrjitam eva vā, tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ mama 
tejoṁśasaṁbhavam (Gita 10.41). Whenever you find 
excellence of any kind—it may be even a whirlwind, a 
tornado, a heavy downpour or a flood, anything that is 
extraordinary—you must consider that the finger of God is 
operating there. If you find tremendous power, great 
strength, agility, knowledge, goodness of an extremely lofty 
type anywhere, you must see the divinity there. “Even in a 
lion I am present,” He says. The king of the jungle has an 
element of divinity, and so he rules. Even a supreme 
administrator of a country is supposed to be imbibed with 
some element of God; otherwise, he cannot control the 
nation. That element of super-individuality, which is 
actually the meaning of divinity, is present in all 
administrators, kings, rulers, presidents, or whatever they 
are called. So is the case with anything in this world. 
189 
 


===== PAGE 190 / 266 =====

Wherever 
there 
is 
excellence 
of 
any 
kind—great 
scholarship, great oration, great capacity to write, great 
poetry, great art, great painting, great music, great power, 
great authority, great ability of any kind—God is operating. 
Various 
instances 
of 
this 
super-excellence 
are 
enumerated in the Tenth Chapter. God is here itself. You 
can see God in front of you in the beauty of the tender 
leaves of the tree, in the mellifluous flow of the Ganga, in 
the majesty of the Himalayas, in the brilliance of the Sun, in 
the blueness of the sky; everywhere you can see God. The 
very earth that supports you is God manifest. The very 
breath that you breathe is His blessing. 
With these consoling messages, the Gita comes nearer 
and nearer to us in its message of divinity and Godliness. It 
is in the Eleventh Chapter that God becomes only God, and 
there is nothing but God. Up to this time you have heard so 
many things, and you know what these things are. So much 
instruction—do this, don’t do that; this must be done, this 
must not be done; God has created the world; there is 
adhyatma, adhibhuta, adhidaiva; there are individuals, 
psychological function, society, and things in objective 
nature. So many things you have heard. Now everything is 
brought to a close, as it were. The Director of the drama 
winds up His play, and absorbs everything into Himself. 
Arjuna poses a question at the beginning of the 
Eleventh Chapter. “Wondrous is this teaching, my Lord. 
You have made me immensely happy when you said 
mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kiṁcid asti (Gita 7.7): ‘Nothing 
outside me can exist.’ The absoluteness of God does not 
permit anything external to Him. Externality delimits God’s 
190 
 


===== PAGE 191 / 266 =====

existence, and He would become a finite person if there 
were external things. The superiority and absoluteness, the 
infinitude, the spacelessness and timelessness of God 
precludes any kind of outsideness in God’s existence. This 
is what I have heard from you. Is it possible to have a vision 
of this Great Being? Am I blessed to behold this great 
Universal Reality with my eyes?” This is a queer question 
for a mortal to put before the Almighty Master.  
And the kindhearted teacher says, “You can, but you 
cannot behold the Cosmic Reality with your two eyes which 
are meant only for sensory operations, and which always 
externalise objects and tell you that all things are outside. 
With these eyes, you cannot have the vision of the 
Almighty. This Infinite Being can be beheld only by a 
consciousness that is within. The eye of consciousness can 
behold it.”  
Divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ (Gita 11.8). “A divine eye is 
bestowed upon you here, by My grace.” The divine eye is 
not this kind of eye, but an eye of the soul itself. The soul 
alone can behold the Universal Soul. These sense organs—
eye, ear, and so on—cannot. You cannot see God, touch 
Him, smell Him, or have any sense contact with Him 
because sensory operations are externalised actions in space 
and time. Spaceless and timeless existence cannot be 
contacted. It is not a contact at all. The soul is of the nature 
of the Absolute, made in the image of God, as they say, and 
can behold God. The soul alone can behold God, not any 
apparatus of this body. 
So the Master says, “I shall bestow upon you a rare 
opportunity of having the power to visualise this Supreme 
191 
 


===== PAGE 192 / 266 =====

inclusiveness, the interconnectedness of all things, where 
everything is everywhere. God is everywhere; everything is 
everywhere. All things of this world and the other world, of 
all the realms of creation—heaven and earth and hell, 
everything you can find—is interconnected in this cosmic 
timeless infusion of the reality of all existences.” Suddenly 
there was a flash, the Gita says. What kind of flash was it? It 
was not the flash of light that you can see with your eyes. It 
was not the sunlight that you see. You cannot open your 
eyes and look at the Sun, but thousands of Suns arose 
simultaneously in the horizon, as it were. Imagine what that 
would be like. That kind of light flashed before Arjuna.  
Divi sūryasahastrasya bhaved yugapad utthitā, yadi 
bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ (Gita 
11.12). Na tatra sūryo bhāti (Katha 2.2.15), says the 
Upanishad. The Sun is like darkness, like a firefly, as it 
were. The light of the Sun is actually virtual darkness before 
that light. Na tatra sūryo bhāti: The moon and the stars and 
fire will not shine there.  
Na candra-tārakam, nemā vidyuto bhānti, kuto’yam 
agniḥ: tam eva bhāntam anubhāti sarvaṁ tasya bhāsā 
sarvam idaṁ vibhāti (Katha 2.2.15). All the lights of this 
world are reflections, perhaps distorted reflections, of the 
Almighty Light. That light shone before Arjuna, whose soul 
was shaken up completely. The personality broke, as it 
were, and this shattering which Arjuna felt before this 
incomparable majesty of the Almighty made him sing 
prayers, which are incomparable in themselves. 
When you are in the state of ecstasy, you do not know 
what you are speaking. When you are angry, you also do 
192 
 


===== PAGE 193 / 266 =====

not know, and say anything that you like. But much more is 
the difficulty you feel in ecstasy. The mouth shuts and the 
tongue ceases to operate, and if you say anything, you do 
not know what you are saying, because your words at that 
time of divine ecstasy are of divine origin. The word that 
was God, as it were, manifested itself through the prayers, 
the hymns, the psalms of the great devotee whose soul 
opened itself completely before the Almighty Being, and 
long verses of an intricate nature of beauty and linguistic 
excellence form the major part of the Eleventh Chapter of 
the Gita. 
Can you also behold that? Why should Arjuna alone be 
blessed with that greatness? Why not you, or I, or anybody 
else? Arjuna is blessed, yes. You are also blessed—or 
anybody. 
But—there 
is 
a 
great 
‘but’. 
Na 
veda 
yajñādhyayanair na dānaiḥ na ca kriyābhir na tapobhir 
ugraiḥ, evaṁrūpaḥ śakya (Gita 11.48). Any amount of 
human effort is inadequate for this purpose. ‘Human’—
after all, your effort is human; that is the only difficulty. 
You are a person, and that is divinity; it is a Super-person. 
You are a mortal; that is immortal. You are located in one 
place; it is everywhere. How would a localised, mortal 
individual with the frail faculties of sense organs expect to 
visualise that cosmic inclusiveness?  
Therefore, the Gita says no amount of sacrifice, yajna, 
worship, prayer, study, will be of any avail: na veda 
yajñādhyayanair na dānaiḥ na ca kriyābhir na tapa. Who 
will pray? Even intense austerity is not of any utility. You 
are thinking that you are doing austerity. The whole point 
in our spiritual practice is we do not give up the idea that 
193 
 


===== PAGE 194 / 266 =====

we are doing the practice: I do prayer, I study the Bible, I 
study the Gita, I study the Ramayana, I worship in the 
church, I worship in the temple, I do tapasya, I observe 
fasting, I did not sleep yesterday. How many times this ‘I’ 
comes in! This ‘I’ will prevent the Supreme I from 
descending. There is a necessity for the complete abolition 
of personality before the mighty God’s coming. This is the 
reason why it is said that ordinary sadhanas that are 
motivated by personality consciousness, or agency in 
action, even if it be religious, will not suffice. A dedication 
of oneself to God is necessary. This word ‘bhakti’ is used 
here, implying ardent longing from the deepest soul of the 
devotee. 
‘Ardour’ is the word also used in a sutra, an aphorism 
of Patanjali’s Yoga. Tīvra saṁvegānām āsannaḥ (YS 1.21): 
Whoever’s ardour is intense, intensely intense, or threefold 
intense, four times, nine times intense—if the ardour for 
God is nine times intense, God will be immediately present 
before you. This is why the Gita says ordinary effort is not 
sufficient. This kind of vision is not bequeathed to ordinary 
people, whose personality asserts its egoism and confirms 
that it exists again and again. When God comes, man 
cannot stand before Him. He has to get absorbed in His 
mighty radiance. And as long as you stand outside as a 
person looking at God, you will not see the real God 
because the God you look at becomes an object and He 
becomes an individual in space and time, and it will look 
like a mountain or a river or a sky. Nothing of the kind is 
possible because the soul, which has descended from God 
Himself, has to go to God. That which is an evolute of 
194 
 


===== PAGE 195 / 266 =====

God’s existence must return to the original source, and it 
can know God only when it has become God or, rather, 
entered into God’s being, because the effect has to enter 
into the cause. As long as the effect is outside the cause, it 
cannot know that its relation to the cause is internal. It 
always feels that it is outside. God is the material as well as 
the instrumental cause of creation, it is said. He is not 
creating the world like a potter manufacturing pots out of 
clay or mud. There is no mud before God. There is no 
wood, no steel, no cement. Nothing of the kind is before 
God to create this world. He created out of the abundance 
of His existence. 
Thus, the superabundance of God itself manifests as 
this cosmos, including yourself, myself. Therefore, this 
abundance that has manifested itself as this outside 
universe should revert and recede into the cause, so that the 
soul that has come from God enters into God and beholds 
God as He beholds Himself. This is the great, wondrous 
conclusion of the message of the Gita in the Eleventh 
Chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
195 
 


===== PAGE 196 / 266 =====

Chapter 12 
COMMUNING WITH THE ABSOLUTE 
THROUGH THE COSMIC TREE 
“How do we approach God?” and “How do we conceive 
Him?” are questions raised at the beginning of the Twelfth 
Chapter. These procedures that we adopt in our endeavour 
to contact God are called, as you know very well, Yoga. A 
Yoga is an art of union with Reality. God, who is the 
Ultimate Reality, is to be contacted by some means. The 
means that we adopt is the Yoga, the method of inner 
communion. 
It is possible to regard God as an all-pervading, infinite 
presence. Or, we can conceive God as a Supreme Person 
appealing to our emotions and feelings. Which is the better 
way? Arjuna put a question: “Are we to concentrate our 
mind on our concept of the Universal Impersonality of the 
Absolute, or are we to occupy ourselves with the Supreme 
Personality of God?” The answer is very interesting: It is 
perfectly all right if you are in a position to commune 
yourself with the Infinite Presence. This is very good. But 
who on earth will be able to achieve this, or perform this 
mighty feat? 
The concept of the Infinite becomes a bare abstraction 
without any inner content when we stand outside it as 
visualisers of the Infinite. The mistake that the concept of 
the Infinite can commit is that it stands outside the Infinite 
when it so conceives it. Who will conceive the Infinite, 
inasmuch as the Infinite includes all the finites? So the 
question itself becomes redundant. Are we to meditate on 
196 
 


===== PAGE 197 / 266 =====

the Infinite Impersonality? Who are ‘we’? What kind of ‘we’ 
or ‘I’ is this? Who is it that is thinking in this strain? Is there 
anyone capable of conceiving the Infinite? The Infinite 
precludes the concepts of finitude of every kind—finitude 
of even the conceiving person, the seekers of God. As long 
as this body is here as a so-called hard substance clinging to 
our consciousness, as long as even the best of seekers of 
Truth cannot forget that he or she has a body, a strong 
isolated personality and the consciousness of ‘I’ exists. The 
best of people cannot overcome this consciousness of ‘I 
exist’. The consciousness of ‘I exist’, or the awareness of the 
so-called ‘me’, will not be able to achieve this feat of the 
communion with the Infinite.  
Kleśodhikataras teṣāṁ avyaktāsaktacetasām (Gita 
12.5): A great difficulty, great sorrow, great problem indeed 
is this for anyone to think of the Infinite, inasmuch as the 
Infinite alone can think the Infinite. The only one who is fit 
to meditate or conceive the Infinite is the Infinite itself, and 
no one else can do that because anyone else is a finite. So 
while it is a wonderful thing to hear that someone is 
attempting to conceive the Infinite and meditate on the 
Infinite—most glorious indeed even to hear that such a 
thing is possible—is it practicable? It is not practicable as 
long as body-consciousness persists, as long as I-
consciousness of individuality continues. When you exist as 
a person, the Infinite cannot be there. Either you are there, 
or the Infinite is there.  
So we can, for the time being, conclude that nothing 
can be better for a person than to endeavour to contact the 
Infinite. Yet, there has to be a proviso that it is not 
197 
 


===== PAGE 198 / 266 =====

practicable in ordinary circumstances. We can aspire for it, 
we can keep it as a kind of possibility in our future; it is a 
great, worthwhile thing, yet the physical individuality 
which is ridden over with ego and often controlled by the 
activities of sense organs will be an unfit instrument for 
even the notion of the Infinite. 
Therefore, the personality of the individual seeker can 
accommodate itself only with the personality of God. A 
person can contact only a person. A person cannot contact 
a nonperson. There cannot be any kind of harmony 
between personality and impersonality. As every one of us 
is a person, God also has to be a person for us—a Supreme 
Person. We can stretch our imagination to the extent of 
excluding everything outside His personality. Mighty 
Visvarupa, Cosmic Form, All-inclusive God, Almighty 
Father—you may designate Him in any way you like, but 
nevertheless He is the Supreme Person.  
The concept of God’s personality arises on account of 
our impossibility to get over the consciousness of our own 
personality. God’s personality, as we conceive it, is a cosmic 
counterpart of our own individual personality. It is an 
extension of our own notion of what we are, so that God 
would look like a big person and something like our own 
personality. We cannot think in any other manner. If we 
want to associate immense capacity and great knowledge 
and power with God, the only thing that people can think is 
that He has multiple powers. His eyes are everywhere, His 
hands are everywhere, His feet are everywhere, as the Gita 
tells us. Inasmuch as our hands or eyes cannot be 
everywhere, we have to associate God with everywhereness 
198 
 


===== PAGE 199 / 266 =====

of even the limbs. We are ignorant, and therefore God has 
to be all-knowing. We are unhappy; therefore, God is bliss. 
We are in only one place; therefore, God is everywhere. 
There is an opposite, counter-correlative aspect of God’s 
conception of us in our endeavour to think Him. 
So in the earlier stages of spiritual practice, it is no use 
on the part of any seeker to jump over his own skin and try 
to be infinite if the Infinite becomes only a conceptual 
object, an abstraction to the conceiving mind. Yet, we may 
maintain it as a kind of theoretical possibility. One day or 
the other, this finitude of ours may melt down and the 
Infinite may take possession of us. It is a blessedness we 
may await. But in the earlier stages, God-consciousness will 
take the form of a blessed, benevolent father, mother, 
friend, guide, philosopher—whatever you call it. This is the 
answer Bhagavan Sri Krishna gives to Arjuna’s question: 
Which is the better way for a spiritual seeker—the pursuit 
of the impersonal Absolute, or devotion to a personal God? 
The answer is that both are equally good, under 
different circumstances and conditions. But the body-
consciousness of an individual will not permit an 
immediate communion of itself with the infinite Absolute, 
so love of God is what is available to us as a redeeming 
factor. Meditation should be carried on in this way, on the 
Supreme Being, the Creator of the Universe. What kind of 
meditation? How are we to adjust our mind to the thought 
of God? 
As I mentioned, these ways are called Yoga. We have 
four Yogas mainly, as you must have heard—Jnana Yoga, 
Bhakti Yoga, Raja Yoga and Karma Yoga. Four verses, 
199 
 


===== PAGE 200 / 266 =====

commencing with the verse mayy eva mana ādhatsva mayi 
buddhiṁ niveśaya, nivasiṣyasi mayy eva ata ūrdhvaṁ na 
saṁśayaḥ (Gita 12.8), briefly adumbrate the nature of the 
practice of the four Yogas: Concentrate yourself on Me 
only, to the exclusion of everything else. Let your mind be 
devoted to Me and the intellect dedicated to Me, and you 
shall reside and abide in Me. The abiding of oneself in God 
is the crucial point in Jnana Yoga.  
When we tried to understand the meaning of jnanin on 
an earlier occasion, we observed that a jnanin expects 
nothing from God because he wants God only. To want 
God is to abolish oneself as a person because of the infinite 
inclusiveness of God. So the abiding of oneself in God 
implies, would suggest, a total surrender of oneself to the 
extent of annihilation of personality itself; otherwise, 
abiding in God would be difficult. You would be abiding in 
God as a separate entity there, and the infinitude of God 
would not permit that situation. So this verse is a 
suggestion for Jnana Yoga: seeing everything everywhere. 
Taccintanaṃ 
tatkathanam 
anyonyaṃ 
tatprabhodhanam, etad ekaparatvaṃ ca brahmābhyāsaṃ 
vidur budhāḥ (Panchadasi 7.106). Brahmārpaṇaṁ brahma 
havir brahmāgnau brahmaṇā hutam, brahmaiva tena 
gantavyaṁ brahmakarmasamādhinā (Gita 4.24). These 
verses tell us that our occupation in daily life should also 
get melted down into the very process of meditation. Work 
and meditation do not stand apart in jnana. There is no 
secular life and spiritual life isolated from each other. In 
jnana, in wisdom of God, there is no secularity, materiality, 
externality, personality. All ‘ities’ vanish. There is only the 
200 
 


===== PAGE 201 / 266 =====

wisdom of existence, wherein one beholds all things 
everywhere. If a jnanin talks, he does not talk on any other 
subject. And when he discourses to people, he will not 
discourse on anything else. He will try to elevate people to 
the consciousness of the Infinite Existence of God and 
depend on the grace of God only. The Gita also tells us 
tadbuddhayas tadātmānas (Gita 5.17): The mind is sunk in 
it, the intellect is entirely devoted to it, and the soul is 
totally inseparable. Depending on that only even for your 
sustenance, such a thing is jnana, which is hard for anyone 
to practice because it depends mostly on external factors, 
under conditions of bodily existence and, to some extent, 
sensory activity.  
If you find that to be difficult, the Lord adds more. 
Without expecting any word from the disciple, the Teacher, 
the Master, the Guru apprehends the difficulties that are 
possible in the case of an ordinary seeker, and without even 
a question raised, the answer comes as an emendation of 
the first doctrine of jnana: If this is not possible, go on 
practicing again and again the same routine every day, 
whether you succeed or not. A continuous day-to-day 
maintenance of the consciousness of God’s omnipresence 
as jnana may be difficult, but you may try for it at least. By 
practice you become perfect. Sit for meditation at a 
particular time, at any time as is convenient to you, and do 
not forget to be seated for meditation at this particular 
time. You may say the mind is not concentrating, it is not 
coming round. It does not matter; sit nevertheless. Make a 
decision that, “I have sat here for meditation to rouse in my 
mind the consciousness of God’s existence.” And every day 
201 
 


===== PAGE 202 / 266 =====

if the sitting is done, one day or the other the mind will 
come round, and you will succeed. Repeated attempts on 
the part of a person to see that the consciousness of God 
enters one’s mind can be assisted by the study of scriptures, 
the company of great masters and saints, etc.  
Perhaps this is also not possible: “Even that repeated 
practice is difficult for me; my knees are aching and my 
back is paining in excruciating agony, and my mind is 
flitting from one thing to another thing; even my simple 
practice is difficult, let alone jnana, or the knowledge of 
God.” The Lord says if the second prescription is also not 
fitting to you, love God with all your heart and all your soul 
and all your might. Can you not at least love? Are you so 
poor that even love is not possible? I am not asking you to 
concentrate your will or strain your intellect or reason. I am 
telling you some simple recipe. Be immensely affectionate 
to God. You can love God and want nothing else. Always 
wanting God is the highest sadhana, as you will realise one 
day or the other. If you do not want Him, all your efforts, 
concentration of will—dhyana, bhakti, karma—nothing 
will work. As love can emanate from a person 
spontaneously on account of the preponderance of the 
emotional faculty in oneself, loving God is considered as 
easier, especially in this age of distraction and sufferings of 
various kinds. The directing of one’s feelings and emotions 
to God in utter devotion and surrender is to be considered 
as the best of Yogas. You need not go to Patanjali’s Sutras 
or Yoga Vasishtha or the Upanishads; they are very difficult 
things. If you love anyone, the love is reciprocated 
automatically. Your affection will be felt even by animals 
202 
 


===== PAGE 203 / 266 =====

and trees. Therefore, if you cannot sit for meditation every 
day and carry on this practice, at least in your heart be 
devoted to God. 
But that also is not possible. You have an excuse for that 
also; even love is not possible. What else is possible? “I will 
do work. I am very busy with all kinds of work, so I have no 
time to love anybody.” If you say that, okay; if you do not 
want to love even God Himself, do your work. But 
whatever fruit accrues out of your work, offer it to God. If 
you get something as a fruit, as a consequence, as a result, a 
fructification of your deeds, do not enjoy those fruits. The 
phala tyaga, or the abandonment of the fruits of one’s 
action and the dedication of these fruits as a consecration to 
God, that also is a Yoga, and God says He can be satisfied 
with it. Sarva-karma-phala-tyāga (Gita 12.11) is also a great 
Yoga. 
But the mind is such a mischievous imp that it will not 
permit you to do even that: “Why should I abandon the 
fruit? It is my tree and, therefore, the fruit also is mine only. 
How can the tree be mine and the fruit be somebody else’s? 
If I do hard work, I will reap the fruit thereof. And if God 
takes the fruit, and I work hard, the mind will say that this 
is no good.”  
You have to expect something. The expecting of some 
result as a consequence of your deeds is to create a gulf 
between the fruit and the action because the action is 
confined to the present, while the fruit is in the future. The 
expectation of the fruit of an action is also a miscalculation. 
The fruit you accrue is not in your hands. Only the action is 
your prerogative. Work you must, but you cannot expect a 
203 
 


===== PAGE 204 / 266 =====

particular result to follow from it. While you have the 
choice and the freedom to act according to the ability of 
your higher reason, you cannot know at that time what 
consequence will follow from that action because the result 
of an action is conditioned and determined by various 
other factors which are not always under your control. 
First of all, the fruit is in the future, not in the present; 
therefore, your expectation of the future fruit will cause 
unnecessary distress in your mind: when will it come, when 
will it come, when will it come? And when it comes, it may 
not come in the way you expected. So many a time you find 
that your actions fail, as they do not bring you what you 
wanted. Sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ 
(Gita 18.48), says the Bhagavadgita: Every action that one 
performs is infected with some defect. As no one can be 
omniscient, no one can know what kind of result will follow 
from a particular action. Unexpected result follows. 
Therefore, expecting a result of an action is not wise. Let 
anything come, and offer it to God. You have done your 
duty. 
Here also a caution has to be exercised that the work 
that you perform should be a duty, and not merely any kind 
of humdrum activity. Selfish action cannot be regarded as 
duty. A duty is an incumbent operation on your part for the 
welfare of a larger inclusiveness of your personality which 
comprehends other people also. Service of nation, service of 
people, service of humanity, does not actually mean service 
of somebody outside you. Outsideness also brings 
selfishness, together with it. The people outside, so-called—
humanity in general whom you are serving—are not 
204 
 


===== PAGE 205 / 266 =====

standing outside you as independent individuals. They are 
included as ingredients in a larger comprehensiveness of a 
vital selfhood you call the self of humanity. Actually, you 
are serving the larger self of your own individual self, you 
may say. In your service to people you have actually 
expanded the dimension of yourself, and you see yourself in 
the selves of other people. The otherness of people gets 
obliterated completely as soon as the Selfhood in them is 
recognised. You see people as ends, and not as means. 
So the duty that you perform is a kind of participation 
in the welfare of the world as a whole, and not some work 
that you do for personal gain or profit. If this kind of 
unselfish action is performed, and your life is devoted to 
this kind of unselfish work, and the fruit is dedicated to 
God only, that is also a great Yoga, and God is satisfied with 
it. How a devotee behaves in this world—how gentle and 
good, how compassionate, how satisfied, how non-
complaining—is described towards the end of the Twelfth 
Chapter. 
It is in the Thirteenth Chapter that we have some 
philosophical considerations once again brought out which 
were perfunctorily touched upon in the earlier chapters of 
the Gita. The cosmological doctrine of the creation of the 
universe was covered in our earlier considerations—how 
the world evolved from God—and you know it through the 
Sankhya doctrine of evolution. Briefly the Thirteenth 
Chapter also mentions the creation of the five elements, the 
tanmatras, and the individualities of a person.  
Mahābhūtāny ahaṁkāro buddhir avyaktam eva ca, 
indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca pañca cendriyagocarāḥ (Gita 13.5), 
205 
 


===== PAGE 206 / 266 =====

and the next verse, icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ 
saṁghātaś 
cetanā 
dhṛtiḥ, 
etat 
kṣetraṁ 
samāsena 
savikāram udāhṛtam (Gita 13.6) both tell us briefly that the 
universe is constituted of the five elements, the mind, 
intellect or reason, Avyakta Prakriti, and the Supreme 
Being. It was in the Second and Third Chapters that we had 
occasion to know something about this evolutionary 
process, during our consideration of the Sankhya doctrine. 
In the Thirteenth we have, in addition to a brief description 
of the same cosmological process, the life of an individual 
that is to be lived as a spiritual seeker by the gradual 
adjustment of oneself to the realities of life, which is 
described in verses commencing from amānitvam 
adambhitvam (Gita 13.7), etc., all which you must read very 
carefully from a good commentary. 
The presence of God as a Supreme Inclusiveness is 
beautifully narrated in certain verses in the Thirteenth 
Chapter. What is the Absolute? The vision of it we had in 
the Eleventh Chapter, in a beautiful literary style. Some 
verses of the Thirteenth Chapter tell us what Brahman is. 
Jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute, 
anādimat paraṁ brahma na sat tan nāsad ucyate (Gita 
13.12): Having known which, you shall become immortal. I 
shall tell you what it is. That is the Brahman, the Absolute, 
which has neither a beginning, nor an end. Sarvataḥ 
pāṇipādaṁ tat sarvatokṣiśiromukham, sarvataḥ śrutimal 
loke 
sarvam 
āvṛtya 
tiṣṭhati 
(Gita 
13.13); 
sarvendriyaguṇābhāsaṁ sarvendriya-vivarjitam, asaktaṁ 
sarvabhṛc caiva nirguṇaṁ guṇabhoktṛ ca (Gita 13.14); 
bahir antaś ca bhūtānām acaraṁ caram eva ca, sūkṣmatvāt 
tad avijñeyaṁ dūrasthaṁ cāntike ca tat (Gita 13.15); 
206 
 


===== PAGE 207 / 266 =====

avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu vibhaktam iva ca sthitam (Gita 
13.16). 
Jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute: 
The pervadingness of God, the inclusiveness of this 
Absolute, and the unconditioned existence of what is called 
Brahman is described in these verses. It is, on the one hand, 
the light that shines in your own heart. On the other hand, 
it is the creative principle in the cosmos. It is Atman inside 
and Brahman outside. It is the Self within everybody and 
also the Universal Reality outside. And all values in life, all 
that you consider as good, all that is meaningful in itself, is 
a manifestation of this Great Principle. 
Avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu vibhaktam iva ca sthitam. It 
appears to be divided into various particularities, while it 
beholds the apparent particularities or individualities. But it 
is avibhaktaṁ: it is really undivided. It is undivided because 
it exists even between the so-called divided objects, the 
terms of divided relation. When something is different 
from another thing—one thing is divided from another—
the consciousness of this division, the awareness of there 
being two things, is there at the same time, transcending the 
two things. There is a relation that transcends the terms of 
the relation. A is different from B, but the one who is 
conscious of the difference between A and B is neither A 
nor B; therefore, there is a transcendent principle present 
even in the so-called divided object—avibhaktaṁ. The 
adhidaiva 
principle, 
which 
is 
undividedly 
present 
everywhere, connects the so-called particulars. 
Bhūtabhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca 
(Gita 13.16): It absorbs everything into itself as the body, 
207 
 


===== PAGE 208 / 266 =====

the sense organs, and the mind are held in unison by the 
Atman consciousness within them. We feel a sense of 
integratedness of our personality on account of the 
Selfhood within us; otherwise, we would be dismembered 
shreds of personality, fractions rather, not individual 
wholes. The wholeness that we feel in our own self is due to 
the Atman consciousness pervading all the particulars. So 
many limbs, so many cells, so many parts constitute this 
body, but yet we never feel that we are made up of small 
bricks. We are one continuous, indivisible, compact form. 
This compactness and indivisibility that we feel in our own 
selves is due to the pervasion of that indivisible 
consciousness. It is throughout the body, inside and out. It 
is within, and contacts every little part of the body, giving a 
sense of wholeness, but it operates even outside it—not 
merely within. Its operation outside takes place when we 
perceive objects outside. When we are aware of something 
that is there in front of us, the consciousness within 
pervades in a particular manner through the sensation and 
the mind, and it is manifesting itself as also that which is 
beyond us, transcendent to us, outside us. 
Jyotiṣām api taj jyotis (Gita 13.17): It is the light behind 
all lights. It was mentioned in the context of the Visvarupa 
Darshana: thousands of suns cannot shine before it. All the 
brightest lights that you can think of are like shadows cast 
by that light. Yasya chaya amritam yasya mrityuh, says the 
Rig Veda: Even immortality and death are shadows cast by 
the Absolute. God is not to be considered even as immortal 
because the word ‘immortal’ is coined from the word 
‘mortal’, so it is not a positive description of God. If 
208 
 


===== PAGE 209 / 266 =====

mortality is not there, there will be no concept of 
immortality. Death and deathlessness are both shadows. 
Being unable to express the nature of God positively, the 
great poets go to such ecstasies of literary beauty, they say 
even immortality is not a proper description of God. Both 
death and deathlessness, here and hereafter, earth and 
heaven, are reflections of the Almighty’s archetypal 
existence.  
This is the grand presentation of the structure of the 
Supreme Absolute in the verses of the Thirteenth Chapter. 
Some of these beautiful verses in the same chapter also go 
into the details of how we can meditate by satsanga with 
saints and sages, by study of scriptures, by chanting of the 
Divine Name, by japa sadhana, and such things. A few 
sidelights on the Sankhya doctrine also are shown in the 
Thirteenth Chapter. 
The Thirteenth Chapter is philosophical. Many 
devotees and interpreters of the Gita think that 
philosophical description is to be found in the Thirteenth 
Chapter, the means of devotion to God are to be found in 
the Eleventh Chapter, the means of meditation are to be 
found in the Sixth Chapter, and the art of work or 
performance of duty is to be seen in the Third Chapter. So 
if you cannot study the whole of the Gita from One to 
Eighteen, read the Third for gaining knowledge as to how 
you have to perform your duty, read the Sixth for knowing 
how to meditate, read the Eleventh to know how you have 
to love God as an Almighty Person, and read the Thirteenth 
to know the intricacies of the philosophical aspects of the 
Bhagavadgita. 
209 
 


===== PAGE 210 / 266 =====

The chapters of the Gita that follow from the 
Fourteenth onwards give us some additional insight into 
the themes touched upon in some of the earlier chapters, 
especially the Second and the Third. There are the gunas of 
Prakriti. You know what are these gunas—sattva, rajas and 
tamas. These gunas of Prakriti were considered as the 
substance of Prakriti, the very thing out of which Prakriti is 
made. Now, when we think of substance or thing, we are 
likely to imagine some solid thing in front of us. The gunas 
of Prakriti, or Prakriti itself, are not substances in the sense 
of tangible things. They are forces, not solid objects. These 
gunas are actually energy contents. It is something like 
electric energy. You cannot call it an object. It can solidify 
itself into some objectified form under given conditions, 
but by itself it is a force, an energy, a motion. The gunas of 
Prakriti—sattva, rajas and tamas—are actually motion, 
energy continuum, forces operating not in the world but 
constituting the world itself. The gunas of Prakriti do not 
act as something outside the world; they are the very stuff 
of the world. Today we are told that electric energy is the 
sum and substance of all things. Even space and time can be 
bundled up into a continuum of space-time complex. 
Ultimately the world is made up of not substances or 
things, but energies, forces which devolve on themselves.  
These gunas are described in the Fourteenth Chapter, 
suggesting thereby that they constitute the be-all and end-
all of everything. To remove the idea of tangibility and 
solidity, substantiality, etc., an additional chapter is 
devoted, which is the Fourteenth, where we come to know 
that the entire world which looks so hard, so solid and 
210 
 


===== PAGE 211 / 266 =====

charged with gravitations of every kind is, after all, not so 
constituted. Appearances are deceptive. Things are not 
what they seem. The world is not solid. We feel the solidity 
of a table or a chair when we touch it with our fingers; but 
we are told today it is due to the electrical impulses created 
between the molecules constituting our fingers and the 
molecular content of the object called the table or chair. 
There is a repulsive activity taking place, a colliding of 
atomic principles, the molecular forces that form the object 
into a shape of wood or steel or any object on the one hand, 
and on the other hand they operate through the sensations 
of our fingers, etc. Actually, what we touch is not an object, 
and that which touches cannot be regarded as a finger; it is 
a sensation. If the sensation is not from the finger, the 
touch will not be there. If we cannot have the sensation of 
seeing or touching or hearing or smelling or tasting, there 
will be no world before us. Therefore, the world is sensory, 
sensational, which means to say, it is non-solid. It is liquid, 
as it were, a non-substance, and it fades into airy nothing.  
God actually created the world out of nothing, because 
there was no material substance before God. Either we 
should say God created the world out of Himself, or we 
should say that He created it out of nothing. To say that 
God created the world out of Himself is to say the world 
does not exist except God; and to say that God created it 
out of nothing is again to say God only is, and nothing else 
exists. Prakriti, the gunas and the Sankhya doctrine, and the 
adumbration of all these properties that we are discussing, 
finally lands us in a negation of all particularity, externality, 
and the very world-consciousness itself. 
211 
 


===== PAGE 212 / 266 =====

In the Fifteenth Chapter we are taken to a height of a 
different type altogether where the cosmological theory is 
brought before our eyes once again in a new fashion. 
Ūrdhvamūlam adhaḥśākham (Gita 15.1): This universe can 
be compared to a tree with its roots up and its branches 
down. Usually the roots of trees are below and the branches 
shoot forth above in the sky, but here is a cosmic tree which 
is of a different nature. All this world seen with our eyes, 
the entire presentation of phenomena, should be regarded 
as the branches, the twigs, the leaves, the flowers and the 
fruits of this mighty tree of creation, of which the roots are 
above in the Absolute Creative Will. Ūrdhvamūlam: the 
root is above; adhaḥśākham: the branches are below. 
Aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam: The tree is compared to an 
aśvattha, a holy tree, the sacred peepal tree. Aśvattha also 
means ‘that which will not last until tomorrow’. Transitory 
is this world. It will not last until tomorrow, not even until 
the next moment, because every new moment is the 
creation of a new form and a shape of the structural pattern 
of creation. So the world is transient, momentary, a 
fluxation, and it is not a solidity. That is why it is called 
aśvattha—na śvaha tha. Aśvatthaṁ prāhur avyayam. 
Chandāṁsi yasya parṇāni yas taṁ veda sa vedavit: All 
the Vedic knowledge, all knowledge whatsoever of any 
kind, should be regarded as the leaves of this mighty tree. 
The knowledge of the world is also a manifestation of this 
tree. Sankaracharya, especially in his commentary on this 
description of the inverted tree in the Katha Upanishad, 
goes into great details of beautiful enunciation of the 
212 
 


===== PAGE 213 / 266 =====

problems we feel in our life and the manner in which we 
are connected to the Ultimate Being. 
The root sustains the whole tree; therefore, if you 
manure and water the root, you will be feeding virtually the 
whole tree. If you want to see that the leaves are green and 
luscious, and there is flowering and that the tree yields fruit, 
you water the tree and put manure. But you will not 
manure and water the leaves, though they are actually what 
are in your mind. Although you are not interested in the 
root of the tree as much as the fruit and the leaves, still 
when you tend the tree, you tend the root because the 
leaves 
and 
branches 
are 
automatically 
nourished 
spontaneously by the nourishing of the root.  
Mūlaḿ hi viṣṇur devānāḿ, yatra dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ 
(Bhagavatam 10.4.39): The Supreme Being is the root of all 
things. If you serve God, you serve entire humanity. On the 
other hand, if you serve all the leaves and allow the root to 
dry up, you have virtually done no service. So you may do 
any kind of service to your brethren and your family 
members, and even to the whole world of people, but you 
have done nothing at all if the root is forgotten. If the root 
withers and dries up and your love is not there, if your 
concentration is diverted from the root’s welfare and goes 
to the leaves and the branches, then your service is nil. You 
have to learn the art of moving from the leaves, the twigs 
and the branches to the root, through the stem.  
That Great Being is to be sought after, says the Fifteenth 
Chapter, by withdrawal of sense organs and humility of 
practice. The process is gradual ascent. We are down below 
in the form of these manifested shapes of the tree as leaves, 
213 
 


===== PAGE 214 / 266 =====

flowers, fruits, branches, twigs, etc. We have to go gradually 
through these processes to the trunk, and then touch the 
root. Having gone there, we see the whole tree present in an 
incipient form.  
You will find the entire universe in God. In the root, in 
the seed, you will find the whole banyan tree. The little seed 
of the banyan, so minute in its contents, that tremendously 
insignificant little particle of seed, contains within itself this 
tremendous expanse of the banyan which can give so much 
shade. So is this invisible Reality looking like an abstraction 
and no substance at all, a non-entity for us. God is a non-
entity because He cannot be seen with the eyes. He cannot 
be contacted because He is non-objective. Such a non-
objective, so-called abstraction of intellect is the very reality 
of all things. As this solid, mighty banyan is in this 
insignificant, invisible seed, the so-called invisibility of God 
will become the substantial visibility when you see the 
cosmos present in everything. When baby Krishna yawned, 
the entire ocean, the entire sky and time were seen inside 
his mouth. 
So this mighty tree is only an allegorical description of 
the creative process which was otherwise described in 
earlier chapters. This world is one aspect of the 
manifestation of this tree which is there before us as an 
object, and ourselves as subjects of perception also stand 
there as another aspect. And a third aspect is 
Purushottama. Dvāv imau puruṣau loke kṣaraś cākṣara eva 
ca, kṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni kūṭasthokṣara ucyate (Gita 
15.16); uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ, 
yo lokatrayam āviśya bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ (Gita 15.17). 
214 
 


===== PAGE 215 / 266 =====

Kshara and akshara are the perishable and imperishable 
aspects of creation. The perishable aspect is the adhibhuta, 
the imperishable aspect is the soul in the adhyatma or 
individual. Transcending both is the Purushottama, the 
Supreme Person. Reaching and having known Him, you 
will remain perfectly blessed, says the Fifteenth Chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
215 
 


===== PAGE 216 / 266 =====

Chapter 13 
THE POSITIVITY AND THE NEGATIVITY OF 
EXPERIENCE 
Reference was made in the Fourteenth Chapter of the 
Gita to the three properties of Prakriti known as the 
gunas—sattva, rajas and tamas. It is on the basis of this 
distinction of the three properties of Prakriti manifested 
both cosmically and individually that in the Fifteenth 
Chapter a further distinction was drawn among Kshara, 
Akshara, and Purushottama. In a way, this distinction is 
comparable to the difference that we noticed earlier among 
adhyatma, adhibhuta and adhidaiva. Adhyatma is 
comparable with the Akshara Purusha, adhibhuta with the 
Kshara Purusha, and adhidaiva with the Purushottama. 
Dvāv imau puruṣau loke kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca, kṣaraḥ 
sarvāṇi bhūtāni kūṭasthokṣara ucyate (Gita 15.16); 
uttamaḥ puruṣas tv anyaḥ paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ, yo 
lokatrayam āviśya bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ (Gita 15.17). 
The perishable is the adhibhuta; it is the Kshara Prakriti. 
The tamasic nature, which is perishable and is visible to us 
in the form of the objective universe, is what is 
apprehended in perception and cognition by the Akshara, 
which is the consciousness that beholds and knows all 
things. The consciousness that is responsible for the 
awareness of anything in this world is considered as 
imperishable in comparison with everything that changes 
in the world in the process of evolution—namely, Kshara. 
That which changes is known by something which itself 
cannot change. The evolutionary process is, of course, a 
216 
 


===== PAGE 217 / 266 =====

continuous movement, a fluxation in time; therefore, it is 
subject to transmutation from moment to moment. In this 
sense, the entire universe of objective perception can be 
regarded as Kshara, transitory, perishable. But one who is 
aware of it is not perishable because that which is 
perishable cannot know the perishable by itself. Movement 
cannot know movement. There must be something which 
does not move and does not change in order that 
movement and change can be cognised and become objects 
of one’s perceptual awareness. 
But there is something above both the perceiver and the 
perceived. As you have noticed in our earlier studies, the 
perceiver, the subject, the individualised consciousness—
Akshara Purusha, so-called here in this context—is also 
related in some way to the Kshara Prakriti. This relation has 
been explained in the terminology of the Sankhya and the 
Vedanta as the adhidaiva, indivisible consciousness, which 
itself cannot be cognised. That which is responsible for real 
cognition of things itself is not cognisable. “Who can know 
the knower?” says the Upanishad. There is a transference of 
values taking place between the subject and the object at the 
time of perception, and a peculiar twofold modification 
takes place, called vritti vyapti and phala vyapti in the 
terminology of Vedantic epistemology. 
In perception of an object, the mind takes an important 
part. The mind is cast in the mould of the object of 
cognition at the time of the knowledge of the object. That is 
to say, the mind takes the form of the very thing which it is 
supposed to know. But the mind, being a rarefied form of 
the gunas of Prakriti and Prakriti being not conscious at 
217 
 


===== PAGE 218 / 266 =====

all—it is unconscious activity—cannot by itself, of its own 
accord, independently, know anything. The mould can take 
the shape of the thing that is cast into it—the crucible can 
assume the shape or the form of that which is poured into 
it—but it cannot know that such an event has taken place. 
Knowledge is a different factor altogether. 
So in perception, it is not only necessary for the mind to 
assume a formation, it also has to know that such a 
formation has taken place. The objectivity or the objectness 
has to become a content of awareness in the subject. This 
awareness is a contribution that is made by the 
consciousness 
inside. 
This 
procedure 
adopted 
by 
consciousness in assisting the activity of the mind in 
perception is called phala vyapti. 
Thus, there is a consciousness of a form in the 
perception of an object. The form is the particularity that is 
the outcome of the shape that the mind has taken in 
enveloping that particular form, and consciousness of it is 
the effect of the Atman itself participating in a way through 
certain degrees of its descent in the work of the mind. This 
takes place both cosmically and individually. We may say, 
for the time being, these terms Kshara, Akshara and 
Purushottama used in the Fifteenth Chapter of the Gita try 
to blend the cosmic and the individual aspects in a single 
grasp of vision. The Kshara is cognised by the Akshara, the 
perceiver becomes aware of the object. The perceiver stands 
distinguished from the object in the act of perception. You 
do not become the object when you know the object, as you 
know very well. It stands outside you, due to which it is that 
218 
 


===== PAGE 219 / 266 =====

you develop certain psychological reactions in respect of 
that object. These reactions are like and dislike. 
If the objects were not standing outside the perceiver in 
space and time, these vrittis or psychoses of like and dislike 
would not have arisen in the mind. But it is also not true 
that the object is entirely outside the perceiving subject. 
There is a double factor involved in the process of 
perception. If the object is entirely cut off from the area of 
the operation of the subject, there would be no occasion for 
the subject to know that the object exists at all because 
already it is assumed that the object is severed from its 
relation to the subject. There has to be some kind of 
internal relation between the subjective consciousness—the 
perceiving Akshara—and the perceived Kshara. If this were 
not there, there would be no perception; nobody will even 
know that there is such a thing called the Kshara Prakriti. 
Now, knowledge, empirically speaking, is of this dual 
character. That is to say, the object has to stand outside in 
space and time for the purpose of its being known at all; at 
the same time, it should not really be organically 
disconnected from the subject. This intriguing situation is 
created by the action of the adhidaiva hanging, as it were, 
between the subjective side and the objective side which, on 
the one hand, being uncognisable in itself, creates the sense 
of separation between the subject and the object and, on the 
other hand, being entirely responsible for the perception of 
the object, is unavoidable in any act of perception. The 
unavoidable thing is also the invisible thing.  
So you are caught up in a peculiar situation of difficulty. 
This difficulty is what is known as samsara, involvement in 
219 
 


===== PAGE 220 / 266 =====

a peculiar tangle from which you cannot easily extricate 
yourself, this tangle being the expectation of the object to be 
always outside you in order that you may possess it or not 
possess it; on the other hand, you are inwardly longing to 
have assistance of something, without which this 
perception would not be possible.  
Purushottama is supreme. Adhidaiva is the linking 
consciousness which is the transcendent essence between 
every degree of subject-object relation. There are different 
degrees of this relation in the cosmic evolutionary process, 
and the relater—namely, the subjective side—and the 
objective side stand totally cut off in the lowest level of 
experience, especially in the physical world where you and I 
do not seem to have any connection whatsoever. The object 
outside—the thing that you have, anything in this world—
does not seem to have any vital, organic relation to you. 
That is the lowest level to which consciousness has 
descended by its utter segregation from the objective world. 
But as experience rises in its dimension through 
meditational techniques, the adhidaiva, which is invisible, 
becomes more and more perceptible, tangible and 
experienceable, so that the rise from the lower levels to the 
higher will also be a diminution of the distance that appears 
to be there between the subject and the object, so that in the 
highest state the adhidaiva engulfs both the subjective side 
and the objective side and there is no one perceiving 
anything.  
Yad vai tan na paśyati, paśyan vai tan na paśyati 
(Brihad. 4.3.23): Seeing, you do not see; knowing, you do 
not know; being, you do not have any consciousness of 
220 
 


===== PAGE 221 / 266 =====

being in that state where the seer merges into the object on 
account of the absorption of both the sides into the 
adhidaiva, the Universal Consciousness. This is something 
that is to be considered as the import of this marvellous 
verse—a hard nut to crack for many of the commentators 
on the Gita. Dvāv imau puruṣau loke kṣaraś cākṣara eva ca, 
kṣaraḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni kūṭasthokṣara ucyate; uttamaḥ 
puruṣas tv anyaḥ paramātmety udāhṛtaḥ, yo lokatrayam 
āviśya bibharty avyaya īśvaraḥ. These two verses are 
something like mantras that are repeated by every seeker. 
Thus, the concluding verse of the Fifteenth Chapter says 
whoever knows this secret is free forever. 
These three gunas pursue us wherever we go, perhaps 
till the end of the Eighteenth Chapter. This subject started 
from the Thirteenth Chapter, where mention was made of 
Prakriti and its three gunas, Purusha, and Yoga. 
In the Fourteenth Chapter we were told that the three 
gunas of Prakriti are responsible for every kind of 
experience. There are three things, we are told—sattva, 
rajas and tamas—and the import of their action has been in 
a more cosmological fashion described in the Fifteenth 
Chapter. It is in the Sixteenth that we land on a revelation 
which seems to present before us the truth that there are no 
three things, as we have been told up to this time. There 
seems to be only two things: the positive and the negative 
forces. This is the subject of the Sixteenth Chapter: the 
positivity and the negativity of experience. Daivi asura 
sampat is the terminology used here. The divine and the 
undivine qualities act and react upon each other 
throughout creation, right from the highest to the lowest 
221 
 


===== PAGE 222 / 266 =====

level. The three gunas manipulate themselves and operate 
in such a way that they seem to be capable of acting as only 
two forces in the universe.  
Dvau bhūtasargau lokesmin daiva āsura eva ca (Gita 
16.6): Creativity is of two kinds: divine and undivine. There 
can be a divine creativity and also an undivine creativity. 
You can manufacture demons or you can manufacture 
gods, if you so like. Both these are in your hands. But how 
is it that you are capable of manufacturing two contraries? 
These are explainable in terms of what you already know as 
the centripetal and centrifugal forces, as they are called. The 
forces that tend towards the centre of anything are called 
centripetal forces. From the periphery or the circumference 
they gravitate towards the centre, try to become one with 
the centre. This force that gravitates towards the centre of 
anything is known as the centripetal force. But there are 
other forces which ramify themselves in a distracted 
manner from the centre towards the circumference and 
become rampant everywhere. These are called centrifugal 
forces. So there are two operations taking place in this 
world—tending towards the centre and tending away from 
the centre. The daiva, or the divine, is that which tends 
towards the centre; the undivine is that which runs away 
from the centre. 
Now, it is up to any one of us to know how we are 
feeling anything at all in this world. Are you centrifugal or 
centripetal in your experiences? If you are running after the 
world and feel very much wretched, miserable and 
inadequate in your own selves—you feel that you are poor 
nothings, that the world is everything, so you have to run 
222 
 


===== PAGE 223 / 266 =====

after the gold and silver and the wealth of the world—if this 
is your attitude, the centrifugal force is violently working in 
you. But if you feel the world is not superior to you; that 
your being is far superior to the becoming of things; that 
you need not run to things in the world; that the world has 
to come to you on account of the centrality of the 
subjectivity in you—if you are a person satisfied in your 
own self and do not want things to come from outside to 
satisfy you, then the centripetal force is working in you. The 
divine daivi sampat is operating in each person when there 
is satisfaction in one’s own self.  
Yadṛcchā-lābha-saṁtuṣṭo (Gita 4.22). You never make 
complaints, and you never say you want something. You 
have a feeling, a conviction that things are perfectly all right 
in the world and there is nothing wrong anywhere. The 
only thing is you have to adjust yourself to the conditions 
prevailing in the whole creation because it is said in the 
Upanishad, yāthātathyato’rthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyas 
samābhyaḥ (Isa 8). The Isavasya mantra tells us that God, 
when He created the world, seems to have foreseen every 
necessary change or emendation in the constitution of the 
creation, and there is no need for the parliament of the 
cosmos to go on emending things every day or from 
moment to moment. Even the necessary changes that may 
be foreseen after centuries or ages in the future have already 
been preconceived and have been taken care of. That is to 
say, a spiritual seeker’s duty seems to be finally an 
adaptation of oneself to the circumstances in the cosmos, 
and not trying to rectify the cosmos. There is no necessity 
to attempt that impossibility. 
223 
 


===== PAGE 224 / 266 =====

Therefore these two forces, the divine and the undivine, 
are operating both outwardly and inwardly, and the 
Mahabharata and the Ramayana are epic representations in 
a dramatic fashion of the war that seems to be taking place, 
the conflict that is always there between the daiva and the 
asura, the centripetal and the centrifugal, the divine and the 
undivine, the good and the bad, light and darkness. Dvau 
bhūtasargau lokesmin daiva āsura eva ca. 
It appears that the seed for this duality or conflict is 
sown at the time of the creative act itself, as the 
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, for instance, tells us in a very 
dramatic fashion. The One willed to be two; that is all. The 
moment this will has started operating and the One thinks 
it is two, or the two have actually become manifest, there 
arises a necessity to bring about a relation between these 
two. This is the conflict. The conflict of the world is nothing 
but the conflict of relation between things. The most 
difficult subject to study in philosophy is the subject of 
relation—how anything is related to another thing, how the 
subject is related to the predicate. The subject is related to 
the predicate; otherwise, there cannot be any kind of logical 
judgment. But it is also not related to the predicate, on 
account of which it is dichotomised, and it is necessary for 
logic to bring them together into an act of cognition, which 
is deduction. 
Thus, at the very beginning when the Will seemed to 
have taken the shape of a dual consciousness—“May I 
become many”—the manifold revealed itself only after One 
had become two. We do not want to go into details of the 
manifold; two are quite enough for us to create trouble all 
224 


===== PAGE 225 / 266 =====

over in the world. Even if there are only two people in the 
world, war will take place. It is not necessary for millions to 
exist in order that there be conflict. Conflict can be there 
even if there are only two because conflict is the 
irreconcilability between one thing and another thing, and 
that thing is precipitating itself into the medley of the 
manifold that we see in the cosmos. So these two forces 
seem to have been somehow or other operating right from 
the beginning of time. We do not know how they started. 
The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad tells us there has been a 
gradual descent of this nature of conflict into grosser and 
grosser forms until we are here, quarrelling among 
ourselves in any way whatsoever. In the beginning it is a 
metaphysical distinction, and not actually a quarrel in the 
sense of brothers and sisters or soldiers fighting in a field. 
That has taken place only latterly. In the earlier stages it is a 
philosophical, conceptual distinction of the subject and the 
object. This has also been mentioned in the Upanishad. I 
am digressing a little from the Gita to the Upanishad to 
elucidate this point. In the earliest of stages, as the 
Upanishad will tell you, the dual consciousness of One 
having become two is again consolidated to the 
consciousness of “I am myself these both”. The One 
convinces itself, after having manifested itself into the two: 
After all, where are these two? “I myself am A. I myself am 
B. I am A and B.” A is not B, of course; they are two 
different things according to the law of contradiction, but 
you cannot know that A is not B unless there is something 
in you which is neither A nor B. So the consciousness 
225 
 


===== PAGE 226 / 266 =====

asserted itself, “After all, I am A and B both because I am 
between A and B—the supreme adhidaiva prapancha.” 
There is a gradual descent from the divine origination 
of this metaphysical duality into the lesser forms of creation 
through the realms of being—the fourteen realms, as we are 
told in our Epics and Puranas—until we come to the lowest 
kingdom of this Earth where that consciousness of there 
being something between A and B is lost completely, and all 
we know is that everything is different from everything else. 
Kali Yuga has come, we say. Kali Yuga is the age of conflict; 
everything is different from everything else, and nobody 
likes anybody. Everyone is at loggerheads with everyone 
else in this Kali Yuga, in which we seem to be somehow 
sunk. As the scriptures say, some five-and-a-half thousand 
years or nearly six thousand years have passed in the Kali 
Yuga, which seems to span four lakhs and thirty-two 
thousand years. So further descent into conflict may be 
expected, but before that we will quit this world. We do not 
want to stay here until the last conflict takes place where 
each one will abolish the existence of everyone else. That is 
Kalki Avatara, the Transcendent Being coming in the form 
of an abolition of both things, subject and object: neither 
this nor that. God will say, “I don’t want this creation at all. 
I made a mistake.” We may perhaps draw this kind of 
humorous conclusion from the act of Kali which, in a 
wonderful way, and in a very unpalatable and destructive 
way, is described in the Epics and Puranas. 
So here we have, in the Sixteenth Chapter, the 
definition of the twofold forces acting in different ways, 
centripetal and centrifugal, the daivi and the asura sampat. 
226 
 


===== PAGE 227 / 266 =====

The asura sampat, which is the devilish form it takes when 
it becomes uncontrollable, is psychologically engendered by 
certain operations in us, to which a reference is being made 
towards the end of the chapter. Trividhaṁ narakasyedaṁ 
dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ, kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas 
tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet (Gita 16.21): The road to hell is 
threefold. The undivine nature can take you to the lowest 
perdition; and its seed is sown in our own hearts. Life and 
death are both operating in our own selves in a mysterious 
way, right from the time of our birth from the womb of the 
mother. 
Desire, anger and greed are the sources of trouble in 
this world: kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas. Intense longing 
for a thing is kama: “It is impossible to exist without it. I 
want it, and I want it in any way.” This kind of 
unquenchable thirst or longing for things is kama. And if 
any obstruction comes in the way of the fulfilment of your 
desire, you are angry at the source of that obstruction. You 
want to see the end of it. This is krodha. Therefore, kama 
and krodha are dual factors operating as a single force of 
longing. One is longing per se, as it is in itself; the other is 
the longing itself acting in a different way against that 
which is derogatory to the fulfilment of the longing. 
It appears that gods, demons and men went to 
Prajapati, the Creator. “Give us some instruction.” 
Prajapati, the great Creator, answered: “Da,” he told the 
gods. “Do you understand what I am saying?” “Yes, we 
understood.” He told the demons “Da”, and the demons 
said, “Yes, we understood what you are saying.” He also 
227 
 


===== PAGE 228 / 266 =====

told human beings, “Da.” “Yes, we understood.” What is it 
that they understood?  
Three people understood the one sound da in three 
different ways. The gods understood da to mean damyata, 
“be self-controlled”, because the celestials in heaven are 
supposed to be engrossed in the pleasures of life. The senses 
become highly rarefied in heaven. We cannot properly 
enjoy things in this world because physicality hampers 
cognition of things to a large extent. The weight of this 
body and the weight of the object obstruct a real 
satisfaction taking place in us, whereas in heaven there is no 
physicality; therefore, there is lightness, buoyancy of spirit, 
and enjoyment is more intense. Hence, inclination to 
rejoicing is more in heaven than even on this Earth. So the 
gods understood, “Yes, he is telling us not to be too 
engrossed in the joys of the senses—damyata. We 
understood. You are telling us that we must be self-
controlled. We should not enjoy through the senses.”  
“Do you understand?” Prajapati asked the demons. 
“Yes. We understand.” Demons are always angry. They are 
ferocious. They kill. They destroy. Their only work is 
destruction. They do not want anybody else to exist. “What 
do you understand?” “Dayadhvam: be compassionate. This 
is what you are telling us. We are very cruel. We 
understand that you are telling us we must be 
compassionate.” Da means damyata in the case of gods: be 
self-controlled; 
but 
da 
means 
dayadhvam, 
“Be 
compassionate,” in the case of the demons.  
What 
about 
human 
beings? 
“What 
did 
you 
understand?” “We understood ‘Datta: give in charity’.” 
228 
 


===== PAGE 229 / 266 =====

Human beings are greedy, they want to possess, and go on 
accumulating land, property, gold and silver. So human 
beings understood da to mean give in charity: “Don’t be 
greedy. Give! Give in charity.” Be self-controlled, be 
compassionate, be charitable in nature. These three 
instructions Prajapati gave to the threefold manifestations 
of these three gunas: passion, anger and greed. These are 
the road to hell: trividhaṁ narakasyedaṁ dvāraṁ nāśanam 
ātmanaḥ, kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas tasmād etat trayaṁ 
tyajet. We close the Sixteenth Chapter with this, and need 
not go into further details. 
In the Seventeenth Chapter, taking the clue from a verse 
towards the end of the Sixteenth itself, Arjuna raises a 
question: “What do you say, my Lord, if people act with 
intense faith but do not follow the ordinance of the 
scriptures? Is that attitude all right? Do we follow the 
scripture always, literally, or is it sometimes all right to 
follow our own faith? If we believe that something must be 
done and it should be like this, scripture or no scripture, 
then should we still follow every word of the scripture, or 
do you give some concession to all those who act by faith?” 
Sri Krishna says, “There are varieties of faith.” Trividhā 
bhavati śraddhā (Gita 17.2): Faith also is not of one kind. 
Conscience is associated with faith, and everyone does not 
have the same kind of conscience. In some people 
conscience pinches, as they say. But in some people the 
conscience may not pinch. It is dead. If the conscience is 
dead and they are only automatons looking like human 
beings but acting like machines, then where is the question 
of conscience? Does the tiger have a conscience when it rips 
229 
 


===== PAGE 230 / 266 =====

the bowels of a cow? Poor little thing, it has not done any 
harm, and the tiger kills it. Where is the conscience of the 
tiger? Its conscience is in the rudimentary stage. It is 
through the process of evolutionary ascent that the 
conscience, which is the root of what you call faith, 
becomes more and more purified, and we have varieties of 
consciences even among human beings.  
Do we expect every human being to behave in the same 
way always? Are there not cannibals in the world? Are there 
not intensely selfish people who mind their business and 
care a hoot for others? Are there not people of that kind? 
There are people who are a little better; they will do tit for 
tat: “If you are good, I am good. If you are bad, I am also 
bad.” That is another type. But there are some people who 
are always good: “Whatever you say, whatever you do, I 
shall not change my attitude towards you. I shall always do 
good to you.” This is ethical perfection reaching its logical 
limits. But then there are people in the world who are 
saints. They are not merely good people, they are divine 
persons; they are God-men. So even among human beings 
there are varieties of consciences and acts of perception and 
faith. 
Commenting on this question, Sri Krishna goes into 
details of threefold faith in various ways—three kinds of 
food, three kinds of happiness, three kinds of charity, three 
kinds of tapas, etc. This threefold distinction is also based 
on the three gunas of Prakriti. You can, of course, act on 
faith and conscience; there is no objection to it, but it 
should be a sattvic conscience, a harmless and purified 
conscience. It should not be rajasic, and it should not be 
230 
 


===== PAGE 231 / 266 =====

tamasic. You may say, “This is all right,” because you are 
tamasic in nature, or you may say, “This is all right,” 
because you are intensely distracted in rajas, or your ‘all-
rightness’ may depend on the sattvic preponderance in you. 
So how do you judge your action? How do you know if an 
idea that arises in your mind is justifiable or not? How do 
you know whether it arises from sattva or rajas or tamas?  
Wherever tamas is the root of your viewpoint, you will 
see that you do not consider the consequences of your 
action. You are somehow or other bent upon doing 
something. “Heaven may come or hell may come, but I 
have decided to do that.” You do not care for what result 
will follow from your action. Anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām 
(Gita 18.25), etc., are involved in certain actions which are 
tamasic in nature. In the case of tamas, you consider the 
improper as proper, and you have decided that it is okay 
and it has to be done; adamant is your nature. These are the 
despots, the tyrants, the dictators and whatever you call 
them, of this world. They simply grab and destroy, and care 
only of themselves, thinking they are gods and others are 
devils. This kind of attitude may take possession of you 
when tamas preponderates. You have made a decision, and 
there is no duality or wavering in your mind.  
But when you are not able to take a decision—this 
seems to be all right or perhaps the other thing also seems 
to be all right, and do things with a wavering mind, not 
knowing which is proper and which is improper, and act in 
a pendulum-like fashion without coming to any conclusion 
as to what it is you are expected to achieve through the 
action—it is a rajasic action.  
231 
 


===== PAGE 232 / 266 =====

It should be clear to you that something is good, not 
because you have decided it in an adamant fashion, but 
because you have considered the pros and cons of 
everything. Writers on ethics tell us that the action should 
be conditioned by at least three or four factors. Firstly, it 
should not produce a consequence which is worse than the 
condition in which you are now. The tamasic man does not 
know what consequence will follow; he will simply go 
ahead. A little reason, a little intellection and vichara shakti 
should be employed, by which you are in a position to 
foresee what would be the result or consequence of that 
particular deed. The consequence should not be retrograde 
or harmful either to yourself or to others. It does not mean 
that it can harm somebody while it is doing good to 
somebody else. It is not paying Peter and harming Paul. It 
should be good for both Peter and Paul. Thus, the pros and 
cons have to be considered before you take any particular 
step, and the consequence should not be bad, either for you 
or for others. It is difficult to take such a step, because 
always you will be in a quandary.  
Secondly, the motive behind your doing anything 
should be justifiable—consequence or no consequence, that 
is a different thing. Sometimes, by some peculiar act of 
chance, no consequence will follow, but it is your motive 
that is important—with what intention you have done it. If 
the intention is not justifiable, that action is not a good 
action, in spite of there being no consequence. 
The third is, the instruments that you employ for the 
performance of an action. They must be justifiable means. 
Your means must be as good as the end. It does not mean 
232 
 


===== PAGE 233 / 266 =====

the end justifies the means always, that you can do anything 
for the sake of achieving a particular end. That is the 
Machiavellian theory, which is not always accepted as 
ethically or morally proper. 
And lastly, the act should engender a beneficial 
atmosphere around you, and you must become a better 
person than you were earlier. Who will do any work unless 
it is going to be for your betterment? Are you such a fool 
that you go on doing something for nothing? You always 
expect some betterment of your personality. By doing 
something, you shall become better tomorrow; otherwise, 
why are you doing anything? So, ensure that when you do 
anything, these four factors are there. And there are many 
other factors also, as the Gita will tell us.  
So there are difficulties in actually employing our 
conscience and our faith unless they are conditioned by the 
operation of sattva. Very difficult it is to manifest it in 
ourselves. Mostly, even if we are into sattva, there is a 
disturbance in the midst of its action by the interference of 
rajas and tamas. Many a time, when we are intending to do 
some good deeds, we have some suspicion in our mind: “If 
I do this, what will I get?” I am going to do a good deed, but 
subtly some voice will say, “What are you going to get out 
of it?” Now here rajas comes in, and perhaps a little bit of 
tamas also. Are you going to do a good thing because it is 
beneficial to you? Actually, a good deed will be beneficial to 
you. You need not put a question like that to yourself. A 
duty is always beneficial; otherwise, it will not be called 
duty at all. 
233 
 


===== PAGE 234 / 266 =====

In this context, various things are explained in great 
detail in the Seventeenth Chapter: sattvic, rajasic and 
tamasic food; sattvic, rajasic and tamasic charity; sattvic, 
rajasic and tamasic mauna; sattvic meditation, sattvic 
austerity, etc. You can read all these things in detail in a 
commentary. 
Hence, the answer to the question whether it is all right 
to entirely depend on faith is another way of asking 
whether your conscience is pure. Bhagavan Sri Krishna’s 
answer is, it is perfectly all right; there is no objection, but 
be assured that it is sattvic. Your diet should be sattvic; your 
words should not be barbed, cutting and poison-like; they 
must be very sweet and sattvic; they should be truthful 
without being painful; and your joys should be sattvic joys. 
Yat tadagre viṣam iva pariṇāmemṛtopamam, tat 
sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam (Gita 18.37). We seek pleasures 
in this world without knowing what kind of pleasure it 
actually is. We can be happy for various reasons. 
Sometimes there can be a demonical pleasure in us, there 
can be a highly distracted rajasic pleasure, or there can be a 
sattvic pleasure. A pleasure which is sattvic will look very 
bitter in the beginning. That which is real divine 
satisfaction will come to you as something not palatable in 
the beginning. For instance, if you are asked to do japa, 
mantra japa or purascharana, or sit for an hour chanting 
mantra of the divine name, or meditate for an hour, you 
will not take it as a very pleasant exercise. All kinds of 
excuses come—pain of the body, distraction or tension the 
mind, other occupations, emotional difficulties, and what 
not. But if you persist in it by abhyasa, intense practice, you 
234 
 


===== PAGE 235 / 266 =====

will see a good result. If you want milk and curd you have 
to tend the cow, and tending the cow is not a very pleasant 
task; but drinking milk and curd is very pleasant. If you 
want to harvest wheat, corn or rice from fields, will it 
suddenly come from the skies? How much hardship is there 
in it—sowing the seeds, ploughing, protecting it from pests 
and other things, cutting, and so on. What a great difficulty 
of the farmer! And then you eat the rice. So anything that is 
really good has some unpleasantness in the beginning.  
But tamasic pleasure is very pleasant in the beginning, 
and afterwards bitter. You seem to be very elated on 
account of possessing or gaining something by wrong 
means. Very happy! When a person gets something by 
wrong means, the consequence of it is not known. 
Disturbance is the outcome of any kind of pleasure that 
comes by wrong means or that comes through the sense 
organs. Pleasures that are sensory, pleasures that are 
material and physical, and pleasures that come through 
means which are not proper are engenders of sorrow one 
day or the other.  
Ye hi saṁsparśajā bhogā duḥkhayonaya eva te, 
ādyantavantaḥ kaunteya na teṣu ramate budhaḥ (Gita 
5.22): All pleasures born of contact of subject and object are 
wombs of pain. Think for yourself: Have you any pleasure 
in this world that is not born of contact of yourself with 
something? All your pleasures and joys in this world are 
contact-born. Therefore, one day or the other there is 
bereavement. Either you go, or something goes. If you go, it 
is bad. If something goes, it is also bad because all the joys 
you are expecting in this world are born of the union of 
235 
 


===== PAGE 236 / 266 =====

subject and object. As there cannot be a real union of 
subject and object on account of their separation in space 
and time, there also cannot be real happiness in this world. 
Therefore, pursuing joy in this world is pursuing a 
phantasmagoria, pursuing a will-o’-the-wisp. Na teṣu 
ramate budhaḥ (Gita 5.22): A wise one will not hanker 
after the pleasures of sense organs, and will not employ 
wrong means to have pleasures in this world. 
The whole of the Seventeenth Chapter is of this kind, 
the description of performances through three media—
sattva, rajas and tamas. It is expected that your deeds, your 
performances, your sadhana, your attitude, your life itself 
should be conditioned by pure sattva guna, the property of 
equilibrium, harmony and the goodness of Prakriti.  
Oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo brahmaṇas trividhaḥ smṛtaḥ 
(Gita 17.23). Supreme Brahman is designated as Om Tat 
Sat, says the Gita. Om Tat Sat are three terms which are 
considered as very holy. Whenever we conclude some holy 
act, we say Om Tat Sat. When we utter that, the work is 
over, the performance is complete, the holy act has reached 
its consummation. Om is the inclusiveness of all the 
vibrations in the cosmos; and, as you know, the whole 
universe is nothing but a concretisation of vibrations. 
Forces of motions, vibrations constitute even the stuff of 
the hardest rock. When you disintegrate even the hardest of 
subjects or objects in the world, you will find that these 
objects that are stone-like in substance, weight and quantity 
will vanish into thin air. They become continuous forces 
which touch every corner of creation. Everything touches 
236 
 


===== PAGE 237 / 266 =====

everything else in the world, provided it is reduced to the 
condition of a force or energy or motion.  
Therefore, Om is the cosmic vibration which is 
identified with the original nada or the supersonic will of 
God Himself. It should not be called a sound; it is super-
sound. And every other sound, every other vibration, every 
other motion, even in the form of electricity, is the 
manifestation of this supreme designation of God, Om. Tat 
is the That-ness of the Absolute. Sat is the This-ness of the 
Absolute. It is That as well as This—etad vai tat, as the 
Katha Upanishad will tell us. This verily is That—tat tvam 
asi. 
The 
Thatness 
is 
the 
exteriority, 
cosmicality, 
transcendence of the Absolute. God appears to be the 
supreme extra-cosmic creator to the ordinary empirical 
perception. Even the Absolute Supreme Brahman looks like 
an all-pervading supremacy above us. So it looks like a 
That—bhutatathata, as Mahayana Buddhists call it. It is 
also This, the very thing that you see before your eyes. 
Sadbhāve sādhubhāve ca sad ity (Gita 17.26): All this was 
pure sattva existence in the beginning. Or, Tat and Sat may 
also mean transcendence and immanence of the Absolute. 
The immanent character and the transcendent character 
are represented by the terms Sat and Tat. Tat is the 
transcendent, Sat is the immanent, and the Om is the 
inclusiveness of both the transcendent and the immanent. 
It is a wonderful term, Om Tat Sat. The whole Absolute is 
in your grip. You have visualised the Absolute as a 
transcendent creative super-cosmic existence; you have also 
envisaged this Absolute as immanent in every nook and 
237 
 


===== PAGE 238 / 266 =====

corner of creation. It is not only far away from you, it is also 
very near you. It is also everything. Om is the Absolute.  
So thus, the concluding verses of the Seventeenth 
Chapter give you some wonderful definition of the 
Supreme Reality—Om Tat Sat. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
238 
 


===== PAGE 239 / 266 =====

Chapter 14 
OUR INVOLVEMENT IN THE WHOLE 
CREATION 
The Eighteenth Chapter commences with a question in 
regard to the nature of action, which is a theme that 
predominates throughout the Gita. “Action binds, and 
action is unpleasant,” is the usual notion that people have 
regarding any kind of action. Nothing that you call an 
activity is pleasant and happy in its nature. It binds a 
person in various ways by anxieties of different types. But 
the Gita also says that action is a must. 
What is it that binds, and what is it that is a must? 
Questions similar to this were raised by Arjuna at the 
beginning of this chapter, to which brief answers are given 
in various ways by Bhagavan Sri Krishna. Tyājyaṁ doṣavad 
ity eke karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ, yajñadānatapaḥkarma na 
tyājyam iti cāpare (Gita 18.3). There are people who feel 
that abandonment of action is not permissible, inasmuch as 
action is a manifestation of the very structure of the human 
personality.  
The insufficiencies involved in the very makeup of 
individuality are the reason why nobody can get beyond the 
impulsion to act. You are limited in a hundred ways—
perhaps in every way. Action is an attempt to overcome the 
consequences of the limitations of personality. If you feel 
no limitation—you are self-contained, self-sufficient, self-
existent—then you need nothing at all from outside. If that 
were the case, you would not lift a finger; you would not 
budge an inch. But you feel that there is inadequacy from 
239 
 


===== PAGE 240 / 266 =====

all sides in the total personality of yours—physically, 
mentally, socially, in every blessed way. So to make good 
this defect or deficiency that you are experiencing every 
day, you do a kind of plastering, as it were, as you plaster a 
wall that is likely to fall down. You take your meal, you 
drink water, you take rest, you do this, you do that, but 
however much you may try to maintain this finitude of 
personality through efforts of different kinds, you find the 
next day you are in the same condition. It does not mean 
that today you have fulfilled all the conditions necessary for 
overcoming the limitations of personality, and tomorrow 
you are blessed. Tomorrow you shall be as hungry and 
fatigued as you are today. You are the same person. This 
shows that while action is a necessary evil, as it were, which 
you have to resort to for the sake of getting on and 
surviving in this world, it is not a cure for the malady of 
personality defects. 
The answer is yajñadānatapaḥkarma na tyājyam: 
Action is incumbent upon human individuality as long as 
individuality continues, and its need diminishes gradually 
as the individuality also diminishes correspondingly. When 
your self expands, the consciousness increases in its 
dimension 
in 
the 
direction 
of 
universality. 
The 
individuality also withers away gradually, proportionately. 
This verse that I quoted is a pithy admonition on the 
obligation of every person to engage in certain 
performances, and they are mentioned as three important 
items—yajñadānatapaḥkarma na tyājyam iti cāpare. Wise 
people tell us that yajna, dana and tapas are not to be given 
up, inasmuch as we are connected with our involvements in 
240 
 


===== PAGE 241 / 266 =====

this world. Yajna is sacrifice, dana is charity, tapas is 
austerity. These are obligatory, and every day you must be 
engaged in the performance of these three noble acts which 
correspond to the transcendent divinities that subject us to 
their operations, to people outside with whom we are 
concerned, and to our own self, this psychophysical 
individuality. 
Our life is constituted of basically three involvements: 
involvement in the transcendent divinities that invisibly 
control us, involvement in human society with whom we 
have daily contact, and involvement in the vestures of our 
personality—the five koshas or sheaths of personality called 
Annamaya, Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijnanamaya and 
Anandamaya. You have to take care of your obligation to 
the gods in heaven, you have to take care of your relation to 
society, and you have also to take care of yourself.  
Or, to put it more plainly, it is a threefold duty involved 
in your being an adhyatma and adhibhuta and adhidaiva at 
the same time. You are connected to the adhidaiva 
principle, and you are connected to the adhyatma and the 
adhibhuta every minute of your life. Since you are what you 
are and you cannot be anything other than what you are, 
you are adhyatma, the individual psychophysical person, to 
which aspect you owe an obligation. You have to take care 
of it, protect it, nurture it, educate it, and enable it to move 
forward in the direction of the enlargement of its 
dimension.  
This is done by austerity, tapas. If you indulge in objects 
of sense through the organs of external operations, you will 
be depleting your energy every day. Therefore, self-control 
241 
 


===== PAGE 242 / 266 =====

is required of every person. You have to eat, you have to 
keep yourself fit physically, mentally and socially, but you 
cannot indulge overmuch in any of these acts that are 
otherwise regarded as necessary. You must eat for the sake 
of survival, not for the sake of enjoyment of the taste, says 
the Upanishad. Aushadham: as a medicine you have to take 
food, because if you do not take a proportion or quantum 
of diet which is suitable, the body will vanish into thin air. 
You will not even survive. Eating is for the sake of living, 
and living is not for the sake of eating. We do not live to 
eat, but we eat to live. So to the extent that it is necessary for 
you to live, to that extent you have to give the necessities or 
requirements to the body, the mind and the emotions. If 
you give more, you are indulging. That is called enjoyment.  
The Smritis, such as the Manusmriti, are very specific in 
this instruction that we should not live in this world for the 
sake of enjoyment of objects of the senses. The universe, the 
field of activity in this world, is also a field of education. 
When you go to a school or college, you go there for a 
certain discipline for improvement of personality, and not 
for eating or enjoyment. Education is not an enjoyment; it 
is a discipline. Discipline looks like something totally 
different from enjoyment. You go home after school or 
college and then entertain yourselves with any kind of 
delicacy which you cannot get in the educational 
institution. But you know very well how important 
education is. Discipline is also a kind of necessity, and 
necessity cannot be other than what is a joy for you in the 
long run.  
242 
 


===== PAGE 243 / 266 =====

So nobody can escape from the duty of performing 
tapas or austerity. Every person, especially a spiritual 
seeker—or anyone, for the matter of that—who wants 
anything in this world, spiritual or otherwise, should be an 
austere person. Indulgence is contrary to the welfare of 
beings—not only your personal being, but also the being of 
other people around you. You harm yourself by being 
indulgent and, in a way, you harm other people also by 
your indulgence in the sense that you deprive other people 
of their requirements. So there is a double error involved in 
sense indulgence—harm to one’s own self and harm to 
society outside. Exploitation of people and ruin of one’s 
own personality are involved in every kind of sense 
enjoyment. Therefore, you have to give the body, the mind, 
the feelings and emotions only as much as it is necessary for 
survival. 
Now, what kind of survival? It is not somehow or other 
getting on, just keeping the prana alive. You must be robust 
in health, very vigorous in your personality, healthy and 
capable of utilising this body and mind for the purpose for 
which it has been given to you, which is advancement in the 
pursuit of the Universal Spirit. So you have to be very 
cautious in the performance of austerities, tapas. Do not go 
to extremes. Over-indulgence is as bad as over-austere 
torture of either the feelings or the body. Neither should 
you torture the mind and the body, nor should you indulge 
them. Madhyama marga is the middle path, the path of 
harmony, samatvam. Samatvaṁ yoga ucyate (Gita 2.48). 
Yoga is the harmony of attitude in all respects, including 
your attitude towards the body, mind and spirit. Neither 
243 
 


===== PAGE 244 / 266 =====

give it too much, nor starve it. This is the austerity that is 
involved. You have a duty towards it. Every day you have to 
be engaged in this austerity because every day you have to 
be with yourself. Tapas is defined in this manner. 
Dana is charitable nature, which is your goodwill 
towards others. Now, “Love thy neighbour as thyself” is an 
old saying, and it may be regarded as the highest dictum 
that is available to us for living a good life—the idea behind 
it being that you have to consider other people as important 
as you yourself are. We are mostly selfish people; almost 
everybody has some element of selfishness which somehow 
or other appears and works out a means of establishing its 
superiority over others. Logically you don’t argue like 
this—you never say you are superior to other people—but 
basically there is a survival instinct in every person at the 
cost of anybody else. While you have to survive, it is good 
that others should also survive. In what way are you more 
important than others? All living beings are limbs of the 
same cosmic personality; therefore, a consideration that 
you bestow for the welfare of others is supposed to be 
equivalent to the consideration that you bestow on your 
own self. Charity is this much: a well-being that you extend 
to other living beings who are as good and as aspiring, as 
meaningful, as your own self. This is called charity, dana. 
Every day this has to be performed. Your goodwill for 
people is not only for today; it is for all time and every day, 
as long as you are alive in this world. So, you should adopt 
austerity for your own benefit so that you may not be 
overindulgent or over-starving, and also good will, a 
244 
 


===== PAGE 245 / 266 =====

charitable nature, and a loveable attitude towards society; 
this is dana.  
You have a duty, therefore, to yourself and to society; 
but there is another duty which you may miss in your 
overenthusiasm in regard to people outside and your own 
self—namely, divinities that are superintending over you, 
the invisible gods, adhidaivas. They control even your 
breathing process. The very vitals of your personality are 
operating on account of the working of these divinities. 
Suryanarayana is the Sun god about whom we complain so 
much, and whom we do not consider as anything at all in 
our daily life: “Sunrise and sunset—let him do his work; in 
what way are we concerned with it? He is drudging through 
the skies.” But we cannot exist for three days if solar energy 
does not sustain and energise us.  
The rise of the Sun in the east is actually the propulsion 
for activity of the prana. The Upanishad says, look at the 
rising Sun as the prana of your own being. Throughout the 
diurnal sojourn of this great master of light and energy in 
the skies, whom you consider as a distant orb, you are 
involved vitally. The eyes operate due to the Sun. The ears 
operate due to the Dig-Devatas; the nose operates due to 
the Ashwini Kumaras; the skin operates due to the wind or 
the air principle, and the taste buds operate on account of 
Varuna-Devata. The mind operates because of the Moon, 
the intellect because of Brahma, the ego principle is in 
Rudra, the chitta or the memory is in Vishnu, the hands 
due to Indra, and the legs due to Vishnu, again. Like that, 
every part of your body is operated by some divinity, 
though you are under the wrong notion that you are seeing, 
245 
 


===== PAGE 246 / 266 =====

you are hearing, you are touching, you are tasting, you are 
swallowing, and you are grasping. Nothing of the kind! All 
the ten senses—five senses of knowledge, five organs of 
action—mind, intellect, ego and the subconscious memory, 
all these are external manifestations of an internal activity 
invisibly taking place on account of the working of the 
divinities above.  
Every day you have to offer prayers. There are some 
who do sandhyavandana, the worship of the gods who are 
manifest in the forms of this nature. Early morn is a 
divinity, the rise of the Sun is a divinity, space, time, cause, 
and all the things that you see, even plants and trees are 
manifestations of these divinities. The whole world is filled 
with life; there is nothing called dead matter anywhere, and 
life emanates from the Universal Prana, Sutra-Atma or 
Hiranyagarbha, to which you have to offer your prayers. 
Every early morning when you get up from bed, your 
prayers should be to these sustaining divinities. From all 
ten directions they pour grace upon you.  
Yajna is sacrifice to the gods. This sacrifice can be 
performed as an external act of offering into the sacred fire. 
As symbolic of your feeling you chant some mantras, 
prayers, etc. But prayer need not be in the form of material 
offering. Prayer is a surrender of the spirit to the Universal 
Spirit, to the God of creation, to the spirit manifested as 
humanity, to nature as a whole. Nothing equals prayer. The 
greatest sadhana is prayer. While prayer can manifest itself 
as actual worship in temples or altars in your house or in 
the form the holy fire of yagna, homa, etc., sacrifice can be 
in the form of the chanting of the Divine Name—nama 
246 
 


===== PAGE 247 / 266 =====

japa. Yajñānāṁ japayajñosmi (Gita 10.25), says the Lord: 
Of all sacrifices, recitation of the Divine Name, called japa, 
is to be considered as the best of sacrifices because it does 
not involve harm to any creature, or any expenditure on 
your side; it is just a mental act, an act of feeling. So while it 
is not essential and is mostly not necessary to go on 
performing yajna in the form of material offerings like 
ghee, charu, etc., it is permitted in the case where you feel it 
is an essential. Your heart is what is needed. 
When you wake up in the morning, sit for a few 
minutes at least and be conscious of the great divinities that 
are inundating you, pouring themselves upon you like the 
sunlight pours on everything without expecting any 
recompense. Great God is kind enough to give us free 
sunlight, free air to breathe, free water to drink, and we 
have to be grateful. Namaste Vayo and all the shanti 
mantras are procedures adopted for carrying on this 
prayerful attitude in our daily life. Pray to every god. What 
is this ‘every god’? This is the Universal Spirit operating 
through every little manifestation, even through a leaf in 
the tree. You cannot keep your foot on the ground unless 
you beg pardon from Mother Earth that you are treading 
upon her. Vishnu patnim namastubhyam, padasparsa 
ksamasva me. You should chant this prayer. “O Goddess of 
Divinity, please pardon my keeping my foot on you.” The 
Earth is full of life; it is divinity itself, and you cannot touch 
anything without actually touching God in some 
manifestation, in some manner. 
Yajñadānatapaḥkarma na tyājyam iti cāpare: Sacrifice 
in the form of obligation to the divinities, charitable feeling 
247 
 


===== PAGE 248 / 266 =====

towards people in society, and austerity on your behalf—
these are incumbent on your part. Nobody can be free from 
this kind of work. 
There are verses in the Eighteenth Chapter which go 
into great details of the distinction made among sattvic 
feeling, rajasic feeling and tamasic feeling. When you 
perform yajna, offer your prayers, or do charity or 
austerity, you may be sattvic, rajastic or tamasic, as the case 
may be. You can do a good thing in a bad way, in a 
grudging, reluctant manner, with no mind associated with 
it. You may do your prayer by chanting like a machine 
while your feelings are somewhere else, such as in your 
problems or practical family life. That is rajasic. Or you 
may be slothful or sleepy and go on imagining that you are 
doing some prayer. That is tamasic prayer. And you may 
ruin your personality by not understanding the minimum 
of the proportions with which you have to do your tapas, 
etc. We need not go into all these details just now. I am just 
mentioning even these good things of yajna, dana, tapas 
are of three categories—sattvic, rajasic and tamasic.  
All actions, whatever they be, should not be regarded as 
performed by you independently. That you are not the sole 
agent of any action is another thing that is emphasised in 
some other verse of the Eighteenth Chapter. Adhiṣṭhānaṁ 
tathā kartā karaṇaṁ ca pṛthagvidham, vividhāś ca 
pṛthakceṣṭā daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam (Gita 18.14). Five 
ingredients are involved in the execution of any deed. 
When you walk, when you eat, when you go to the 
marketplace, you do not think that five things are involved. 
You are only the person concerned. “I am going to the 
248 
 


===== PAGE 249 / 266 =====

marketplace to purchase some vegetables.” This is what you 
feel and say. But that is not true. You cannot take one step 
in any direction unless five cooperative factors function at 
the same time. The physical body should be fit, first of all, 
for the requisite action. If you are a soldier, a clerk, an 
officer, a labourer, whatever you are may depend much 
upon the condition of your physical body. So one factor 
that conditions the nature of your action is the 
circumstances of the physical body. How is the body? Is it 
fit for some particular type of work, and not others? 
Everybody cannot be everything. So one factor that limits 
the operation of your action is the condition of your body, 
or the adhiṣṭhāna.  
The second factor is karta, or the consciousness of the 
extent of agency involved in action—to what extent you feel 
that you are actually doing this work of your own accord, 
and not under pressure from somebody. You may be driven 
to do some deed due to circumstances. Then in that case, 
you are not the sole agent of an action, though you are 
doing it independently. If you are carrying bricks or stones 
on your head, or digging, you may be thinking you are 
doing it independently, but there is a compulsion from 
social conditions and other factors which makes you 
undertake that kind of work. So the extent of agency in the 
performance of a particular action is also to be considered 
in relation to its involvement, etc. Hence, the body is one 
thing, and the nature of the feeling of agency is another 
thing, which is called karta. 
Karaṇaṁ ca pṛthagvidham: There are also instruments 
of action. For instance, you may be digging, but your 
249 
 


===== PAGE 250 / 266 =====

instruments are blunt, not working properly, or the nib of 
your fountain pen is broken, so you cannot write well, or 
the apparatus that you use in a scientific laboratory is 
defective; these are various ways in which your instrument 
of action may not be suitable for the purpose, and this 
conditions the result of your action. So the instruments of 
action are the third factor. 
Vividhāś ca pṛthakceṣṭā: The motive behind action is 
the fourth factor. The intention with which you are doing a 
thing is very important, though the intentions are not 
always very clear to your mind. You have a muddled idea of 
even the purpose for which you do some work. You drudge 
in an office, in a bank or a factory. Why are you working? 
The logical answer cannot come immediately. “I have to 
work because I have to live,” a person will say. “I have to 
take care of my family.” That is all; the matter ends there, 
and he does not have to pursue this question further. “Why 
do you want to live and take care of your family?” This 
question will not arise. You have a minimal understanding 
connected with the near future, without any thought or 
foresight, and the motive behind the action itself is not 
always clear before your mental perception. The way in 
which you work will also depend upon why you are 
working. You know very well how they are interconnected. 
I have mentioned four things: the body, the agency, the 
instrument of action, and the motivation behind the action. 
There is a final thing: daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam, the will 
of the Supreme God. The Absolute wills that something has 
to be done in this way, and it will be done only in that way. 
It cannot be done in any other manner. And its will 
250 
 


===== PAGE 251 / 266 =====

manifests itself through the divinities. The eyes and ears, 
etc., will not cooperate if the will is not there. The central 
will of the cosmos decides even the movement of a sparrow, 
or the waving of a little leaf on a tree by the wind. Not a leaf 
will fall on your head unless the Central Will operates. 
Now, here is a great question before you: Who is doing 
anything? Who are the doers of deeds? If these five factors, 
especially the last one mentioned, are determining all your 
deeds, it means all action is done by the universe. The 
whole universe is acting when you seem to be lifting your 
finger. The cosmos is active. A little movement of a single 
atom somewhere in the bowels of the earth is known to the 
distant sky, and the cosmic rays react in other ways. There 
is no secret action in this world. Every action is public.  
The Gita is again specific in this matter to remove from 
your mind the idea of personality involved in action, as if 
you are doing things. Why are you going on saying you are 
doing things and getting bound, when the whole world is 
acting? Nobody else can act, as the whole body is acting 
when even the feet are moving. When the food is digested 
because you are eating, the whole body is active—the entire 
alimentary canal, the respiratory system, everything is 
active. So who does the action? The entire creation is 
acting, and no one has the right to feel that he or she is 
acting.  
Tatraivaṁ sati kartāram ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ, 
paśyaty akṛtabuddhitvān na sa paśyati durmatiḥ (Gita 
18.16). Idiotic is that person, a fool is that individual who 
imagines that their individuality is responsible for 
everything: “I have done everything. I have purchased so 
251 
 


===== PAGE 252 / 266 =====

much land. I have built this house. This is my family. I have 
so much money.” Why are you boasting? You have nothing 
with you. Nothing will remain with you, even for a second. 
Everything will desert you and run away if the will from the 
Supreme Being does not operate.  
Sarvaṁ tam parādād yo’nyatrātmano sarvaṁ veda 
(Brihad. 2.4.6) is a great proclamation from the 
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. As the great sage Yajnavalkya 
says, everything will leave you if you consider yourself as an 
isolated individual. The whole Gita and the Upanishads are 
busy telling you one thing only: that you are organically, 
livingly, vitally involved in the whole of creation. Your 
body is a part of the physical universe. The sense organs are 
controlled by the divinities. The prana is a part of the 
cosmic prana; the mind is a part of the cosmic mind; the 
intellect is a part of the cosmic intellect; Brahma 
Hiranyagarbha, your causal sheath, is a part of Ishvara; 
your Atman is Brahman. Therefore, as an individual you do 
not exist. 
You say this is a building. This building is nothing but a 
conglomeration of various materials—brick, iron, cement, 
lime, etc. If each item that constitutes this structure is 
withdrawn, you will find that there is no building at all. “I 
have a house,” you say. You have a house, which is simply a 
name you have given to a shape taken by various 
ingredients such as iron, cement, brick, etc. “I am here. I 
am coming. I am doing this.” When you say this, you do 
not understand what you are actually blabbering. If the 
materials which constitute your personality are withdrawn, 
let us see where you stand. Let the gods withdraw 
252 
 


===== PAGE 253 / 266 =====

themselves. Let the bricks of this physical body go to the 
physical universe—the mind goes to the original source, 
etc. You will vanish in one second. The individuality will 
not be there. 
Therefore, what does the Gita tell you? Your 
knowledge, called sankhya, should be so perfect that you 
should never for a moment forget your universal fourfold 
involvement, which is basically involvement in your own 
five sheaths, involvement in human society and living 
beings outside, involvement in nature which is manifest as 
the visible world, and involvement in God Almighty 
Himself. Keep in mind that you are a bundle of 
involvements; you are not an indivisible, solid, isolated 
entity. Do not say, “I am doing, I am doing.” Let this 
egoism go, let the ahamkara be surrendered, and let Reality 
take possession of you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
253 
 


===== PAGE 254 / 266 =====

Chapter 15 
KRISHNA AND ARJUNA TOGETHER IS 
VICTORY 
Yesterday we deliberated on what the Gita has to say in 
the Eighteenth Chapter about the nature of action or work. 
We dilated upon yajna, dana and tapas as obligatory duties 
on the part of everyone, the meaning of which we tried to 
understand. 
The Gita has been insisting on a combination of 
knowledge and action. It started by saying Yoga should be 
rooted in Sankhya, with Yoga being the expertness in the 
performance of action, and Sankhya being the knowledge 
on which this action has to be rooted. This has been the 
viewpoint of the Gita throughout. Work, of course, is 
obligatory on your part, but not just any kind of work. It is 
work based on a correct understanding of your position in 
this universe, which is called Sankhya. Thus, knowledge is 
as important as the impulsion or obligation to work. 
Neither can you work in a haphazard manner, nor can you 
be free from it. Knowledge-based action is the message of 
the Gita. 
But what is knowledge? Again here in the Eighteenth 
Chapter, a distinction is made among three kinds of 
knowledge—the worst kind of knowledge, the medium type 
of knowledge and the highest kind of knowledge. The worst 
knowledge is the idea of any person in regard to a particular 
object in the world, to which one clings as if it is the be-all 
and end-all of all things. If any particular thing is the object 
of attraction wholly and entirely, then one concentrates the 
254 
 


===== PAGE 255 / 266 =====

entire universe of values on that object, which happens 
many a time when people are infatuated over something. It 
is that infatuated, erroneous knowledge in regard to any 
object, by which you wrongly think that it is all-in-all for 
you. The mother says, “Oh my dear child, you are heaven 
for me!” If a couple has had no children for years and years 
and then a child is born, that child is heaven, God Almighty 
Himself. They go on hugging it and kissing it, and thinking 
that there is nothing else in the world except this little baby 
that has come. There is nothing else in the world. That is 
the highest treasure. That is called infatuation—wrongly 
thinking that one particular thing is everything—and if that 
is lost, you begin to feel that everything is lost. The whole 
world becomes meaningless, and you would like not to exist 
anymore.  
This is attachment, an emotionally charged notion, and 
is not knowledge at all. This is the worst kind of 
understanding that you can have, where you cling to one 
thing. It may be to money, to property, to some person, or 
it may be to some position that you are apparently 
occupying in human society. Any attachment where one 
particular situation, event or thing is considered as 
everything is the worst, lowest kind of understanding. This 
is the fool’s point of view—the ignorant, uneducated, 
uncultured person’s point of view. 
Higher than that is world-understanding, where you do 
not cling only to one particular thing, and begin to 
appreciate the value of other things also. Everything in the 
world is interconnected like threads in a fabric, into which 
everyone and everything is woven. No thread in the cloth is 
255 
 


===== PAGE 256 / 266 =====

less important or more important than other threads. This 
is the scientific point of view, where the scientist does not 
cling to any particular thing. All things are equally good for 
him because of the interrelation of things in the cosmos. 
The causation and the production of effect in the world is a 
process that is interconnected so that in this world, 
according to the scientific point of view, nothing 
individually, particularly, can be considered as a cause of 
anything. Because of the interrelation of things, anything 
can be regarded as a cause and also as an effect. There is a 
cosmic give-and-take policy, as it were, among things in the 
world. One influences the other, and therefore nothing can 
be regarded as a cause or an effect. While a cause has an 
influence upon a particular effect, that effect may be a cause 
of some other effect, so that everything is a cause in some 
way and also an effect in another way. 
If the interrelation of things in the cosmos frees a 
person from attachment to particular objects only, that 
person is broadminded—we could say educated, cultured, 
and a gentleman. That is a higher kind of knowledge, a 
medium kind of knowledge—interconnectedness. But there 
is a knowledge higher than that, also. 
The idea of the interrelation of things is again 
dependent upon the notion of the duality and plurality of 
things. The items of the world are considered as bits of 
process which act and react upon one another, and 
therefore it is that sometimes we feel there is an organic 
relation among things in the world. Everything is different 
from everything else; this is the lowest kind of knowledge. 
That everything is connected to everything else is the 
256 
 


===== PAGE 257 / 266 =====

medium kind of knowledge. The highest knowledge is 
something quite different from both of these. 
What is that highest knowledge? A question will arise in 
your mind, “How does one know that one thing is different 
from another thing?” Who told you that everything is 
different from everything else? And who is telling you that 
things are interconnected, that one thing is hanging on 
something else? A particular thing which is hanging on 
something else cannot know that it is so hanging. The 
differentiated objects cannot know the difference at all. The 
isolation of things as well as the interconnection of things is 
a knowledge that has to be attributed to something which is 
neither isolated nor interconnected. There is something 
that is superior to both these notions, a transcendent 
presence which is consciousness.  
Sarvabhūteṣu yenaikaṁ bhāvam avyayam īkṣate, 
avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu taj jñānaṁ viddhi sāttvikam (Gita 
18.20). Sattvic knowledge, the highest kind of knowledge, is 
described in this verse of the Gita as that which beholds one 
thing 
everywhere. 
Even 
if 
there 
is 
an 
apparent 
interconnection, as it were, from the point of view of the 
notion of the reason and the mind, truly speaking such 
interconnection cannot become an object of anyone’s 
awareness unless one stands above this concept of 
interconnection. So there is an absolute indivisibility of 
consciousness. The Supreme Almighty is there, before 
which nothing can stand, outside which nothing exists, and 
within which there is no difference. It is not different from 
anything else as one thing is different from other things in 
the world, because outside this Absolute there is nothing. 
257 
 


===== PAGE 258 / 266 =====

Therefore, there cannot be external differentiation in the 
Absolute. There also cannot be internal variety in it, 
because it is indivisible; it is not internally divided. 
Our body is not an indivisible whole. We feel that it is 
indivisible; we do not go on thinking that the body is made 
up of different physiological or anatomical parts. Because of 
the pervasion of consciousness through every limb and 
organ of the body, we do not feel the differentiation among 
the organs or limbs. An anatomist or a physiologist will not 
observe our body in the way we feel about it, but as a 
scientist would see it. 
Differences are of three kinds, none of which can apply 
to the Absolute as indivisibility. There can be a difference 
among dissimilar things, there can be difference among 
similar things, and there can be difference within one’s own 
self. These are the three kinds of difference that we can 
observe in the world. A tree is different from a stone. This is 
difference between dissimilar things, external variety. But 
one branch of a tree is different from another branch of a 
tree. This is difference among similar things, internal 
variety. And the variety that is felt in one’s own self is a 
third category—svagata bheda, as it is called. In Sanskrit 
these differences are called sajatiya, vijatiya and svagata. 
But none of these is applicable to the Absolute Being. There 
is nothing similar to the Absolute, there is nothing 
dissimilar to it, and there is no internal variety. Such a 
knowledge of this great, Indivisible Being should be 
regarded as the highest kind of knowledge, for which we 
have to aspire. 
258 
 


===== PAGE 259 / 266 =====

The Bhagavadgita concludes with a message of 
meditation. It is Yoga. The Bhagavadgita is a scripture of 
Yoga, the art of union with Reality. At the end of each 
chapter we are told, ōm tat sad iti srimad bhagavadgītāsu 
upaniṣatsu 
brahmavidyāyām 
yogaṣastre 
sri 
krishnārjunasamvāde 
mokshasannyasayogo 
nāma 
ashtādaso’dhyāyah: 
The 
Bhagavadgita, 
which 
is 
Brahmavidya, a Yoga Sastra, and the dialogue between Sri 
Krishna and Arjuna, is now concluded with the Eighteenth 
Chapter, called Moksha Sannyasa Yoga. 
Now, these three terms Brahmavidya, Yoga Sastra, and 
Krishna-Arjuna Samvada refer to the three aspects of the 
importance of the message of the Gita. It is the science of 
the Absolute. Therefore, it is called Brahmavidya. It is the 
highest metaphysics and philosophy, beyond which 
nothing can be seen. All that you are expected to know, you 
will find in the Gita. After knowing this, there is nothing 
more to know. Therefore, it is called Brahmavidya, the 
science of the Supreme Being. It is not merely a science, it is 
also a practical application of this science in daily life. 
Therefore, it is called Yoga Sastra. It is a scripture of the 
practice of union with Reality. 
So again here we have an insight into the insistence on 
knowledge 
and 
action 
going 
together, 
or 
rather, 
metaphysical insight going together with practice of 
meditation. Yoga Sastra is the scripture of the art of 
meditation, which the Bhagavadgita is, and it is also the 
system of the Absolute, so it is Brahmavidya. 
What is the purpose of this practice of Yoga? What do 
you gain by the knowledge of this Brahmavidya? What are 
259 
 


===== PAGE 260 / 266 =====

you aiming at, finally? The aim is Krishna-Arjuna Samvada, 
the dialogue between man and God. It is the direct 
confrontation by man of the eternity and the infinity that is 
before it. It is the entry of the soul into the Absolute. This is 
Krishna-Arjuna Samvada. So the Bhagavadgita is a science, 
an art, and a mystical text of union of the soul with the 
Supreme Being. 
Towards the end, as a concluding recipe, as it were, the 
Gita tells something very interesting for us, whose meaning 
it is essential for us to appreciate correctly. Yatra 
yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo yatra pārtho dhanurdharaḥ, tatra śrīr 
vijayo bhūtir dhruvā nītir matir mama (Gita 18.78): 
Wherever is Krishna, the master of Yoga, wherever is 
Arjuna, the wielder of the bow, there is certain to be firm 
qualities, happiness and prosperity. 
In the beginning, in the first verse of the Gita, a 
question 
is 
raised 
by 
Dhritarashtra 
to 
Sanjaya: 
Dharmakṣetre kurukṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ, māmakāḥ 
pāṇḍavāś cai ‘va kim akurvata sañjaya (Gita 1.1). “What is 
happening in the field of Kurukshetra?” is the question 
raised in the first verse. The answer is the last verse: “What 
shall I tell you? You are asking me what is happening. I 
shall tell you what is happening. Wherever Krishna and 
Arjuna are united together, there is victory. Why should I 
tell you something more than this?”  
Nara-Narayanana are symbols of Krishna and Arjuna. 
In the Srimad Bhagavata, in the Vishnu Purana, in the 
Mahabharata, mention is made of the manifestation of the 
Supreme Being as the twin realities called Narayana and 
Nara, who are supposed to be invisibly practising 
260 
 


===== PAGE 261 / 266 =====

meditation in holy Badrinath for the welfare of everybody. 
The Mahabharata says their light envelopes the whole 
universe. Such is the glory and the power of Narayana and 
Nara.  
They are also to be compared to the two birds whose 
story is found in the Munkada Upanishad. Two birds are 
sitting on the same tree. This tree can be the society outside, 
the universe of nature, the entire creation, or your body. 
Any one of these can be considered as the tree. And the two 
birds are there in yourself. You have got two persons inside, 
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. Narayana and Nara are within—
God and demon, man and Super-man, we can say. They are 
within this body. They are in human society as conflicting 
or cooperating media. They are in the world of nature, and 
the supreme vastness of creation. Therefore, the two birds 
refer to the higher principle which is merely conscious of its 
being, and the lower principle which is not only conscious 
of itself, but is also conscious of somebody else outside. The 
Supreme bird has no consciousness of anything external to 
it. It is satisfied with itself. It does not eat the fruit of the 
tree, says the Upanishad. Anaśnann anyo’bhicakaśīti 
(Mundaka 3.1.1): It simply gazes, and feels satisfied merely 
by looking on. God merely knows, sees, and is. That itself is 
the blessedness of God. He need not have to see something; 
He sees Himself only. That is Narayana. And Nara is the 
segregated individual. 
Krishna and Arjuna are supposed to be the 
manifestations of the blessedness of humanity of Narayana 
and Nara. Eternal principles are Narayana and Nara. They 
are even now in Badri-Narayan. Whoever goes to Badrinath 
261 
 


===== PAGE 262 / 266 =====

can receive their blessing. They cannot be seen with your 
eyes, as mortal eyes cannot behold immortal essences. 
Tradition says that there are two mountains, and those who 
have gone to Badri would have seen two mountains, one on 
one side, another on the other side, between which the river 
Alakananda flows. That mountain, at the root of which is 
the temple of Badrinath, is called Narayana Mountain. 
They say Narayana himself is appearing as the mountain, as 
he will not give darshan as he is in himself because of the 
impurity of the observers. The other is Nara Parvata, Nara 
Mountain. So Narayana and Nara are today in the form of 
two hills in Badrinath. Though you cannot see them in their 
divine essences, still they are there. You can touch the feet 
of the mountains; that is sufficient. 
Great power, great glory is associated with these 
presences. In a story from the Mahabharata there was a 
king called Damodava. He wanted to conquer the whole 
world, and had no peace of mind even for a single day 
unless he had somebody to conquer. He went on warring 
with all people, and one day he found there was no one to 
fight with because he had overcome everybody in the 
world. But still he was restless: “I have nothing to conquer. 
This is a miserable life. I must conquer something.” So he 
went to Brahma, the Creator, and said, “I want to conquer, 
but I’m feeling very unhappy because there is nothing to 
conquer. I have already conquered everything.”  
Brahma said, “What kind of man you are! There is 
somebody I know of. You go to him, and he will be equal to 
you in war.”  
262 
 


===== PAGE 263 / 266 =====

“Eh? There is somebody still whom I have not 
conquered? I thought I had conquered the whole world,” 
said Damodava.  
“There is somebody whom you have not seen. Perhaps 
he will be equal to you, and teach you a good lesson. Nara 
and Narayana are in Badrinath. Go and meet them, and you 
can fight with them if you like,” said Brahma.  
“Is it so? Then I shall see to it,” he said.  
Damodava went to Badrinath with a large army, and 
Narayana and Nara were seated in meditation with closed 
eyes. He made a big noise. “Hello!”  
They both opened their eyes. “What is the matter with 
you?”  
“I have come to give battle,” said Damodava.  
Nara replied, “This is not a place for war. Here nobody 
fights. This is a peaceful abode of meditation. It is a divine, 
holy spot. We are engaged in meditation. You have come to 
the wrong place. We request you to go away from here, as 
we do not fight anybody. This is a peaceful area.”  
“No, it is not like that,” Damodava said. “Brahma has 
told that you are equal to me, and I want to fight with you. I 
want to wage a war.”  
Again Nara, the younger one, said, “This is not a place 
for war.” But Damodava went on insisting, and he would 
not budge from that place. Then Nara took a blade of grass 
and charged it with a vehicle called Brahmastra, and let it 
off. One became two, two became four, four became eight, 
eight became sixteen. They went on multiplying. Ferocious 
beams of fire started darting forth and entered the eyes and 
every pore of the body of every soldier, every limb and 
263 
 


===== PAGE 264 / 266 =====

every organ, so they felt they were all perishing in one 
second. The entire army cried, and the king also wailed.  
“Oh please,” Damodava said. “Please withdraw this.”  
Nara withdrew the whole thing and said, “In the future, 
don’t come here. Go back. Don’t be so egoistic.”  
Even Brahma is supposed to pay obeisance to Narayana 
and Nara. One day Brahma was holding assembly in his 
abode, and all the gods were seated there. Everyone stood 
up and offered prayers and salutations to Brahma. 
Suddenly these two entered the hall and passed through it, 
not recognising the presence of anybody there—not even 
Brahma himself. All were surprised. Brahma was seated 
there on the pedestal, divinities were in the audience and 
these two persons crossed the audience, going to the other 
side. The people were shocked and asked Brahma, “What is 
this kind of behaviour?”  
Brahma said, “I will tell you who they are. The whole 
world cannot stand before them. They are Narayana and 
Nara, whose light it is that is enveloping the whole universe. 
No one can be regarded as superior to them, and nothing is 
equal to them. These are Krishna and Arjuna, who piloted 
the entire process of the Mahabharata battle. Wherever 
Krishna and Arjuna stand together in a single chariot, there 
shall be victory.”  
This is a message for each one of us also. You are sure 
to have success in your walk of life if the Krishna in you and 
the Arjuna in you work together in this single chariot of 
your life. Your life is this bodily existence, this social 
existence, and also this cosmic existence. In these three 
layers, may Krishna and Arjuna work in a state of harmony. 
264 
 


===== PAGE 265 / 266 =====

Krishna is God, Arjuna is man. Krishna is grace, Arjuna is 
effort. Krishna is knowledge, Arjuna is action. Krishna is 
the universal, Arjuna is the particular. Krishna is the 
macrocosm, Arjuna is the microcosm. These are certain 
epitaphs we may employ to describe the relationship 
between Krishna and Arjuna. One simply is, the other is 
incessantly active. In the war of the Mahabharata, every 
minute Arjuna was active, Sri Krishna was sitting quietly. 
This is the relationship between God and the human 
individual. Incessantly active and very much concerned 
with all things is the human individual. Concerned with 
nothing is God Almighty. He is just concerned with His 
existence. These two realities have to blend into a single 
focus of attention for the purpose of success of any kind in 
this world. 
Here again we are coming to the question of the union 
of Sankhya and Yoga, the essence of Sankhya being 
Krishna, the essence of Yoga being Arjuna. Work and 
knowledge, action and understanding, the individuality of a 
person and the cosmicality in which it is involved should go 
together in a harmonious setting. Then the energy of the 
cosmos enters into the individual, as the power of Krishna 
was always within Arjuna. The energy of Arjuna, with 
which he lifted the Gandiva bow, arose from the personality 
of Krishna, who was sitting there. Like a solar orb which is 
giving energy to the entire space—without acting in any 
other way, merely by existing it is giving this energy—so by 
the mere existence of this super-individual essence, Arjuna 
wrought everything in the war. And the success went to 
whom? We may say that Arjuna, with his dextrous moves, 
265 
 


===== PAGE 266 / 266 =====

conquered the Kauravas. The soldiers had won victory. But 
from where did the soldiers get the strength to lift their 
arms? The energy came from another source altogether.  
In this way we have to live in this world by bringing the 
God element into our personality, and not excessively 
asserting our individuality. The Gita is a reiteration of this 
incumbent process in which we have to be involved every 
day, that we cannot miss the awareness of God for a second. 
Sa hanisthan maha chidhram sa ch antha jada moodatha, 
yan muhurtham kshanam vapi vasudevam na chinthayeth 
(Pandava Gita 70). This is the Pandava Gita. That is 
veritable hell for you, that is mischief, and that is the source 
of every kind of trouble. What is ‘that’? It is that moment 
when you forget your relationship to that Universal Reality. 
The moment you begin to assert yourself as an independent 
person, trouble has already started brewing. Therefore, the 
study of the Bhagavadgita is not merely an academic 
enlightenment or learning. It is an entry into the very 
system of living in the world. It is a practical practice, not 
merely a theory that you can learn and then give it up. This 
is the Bhagavadgita.  
Where Krishna and Arjuna are together in one place, 
there is victory. Where the individual is in union with God, 
where you are in a state of perfect internal harmony with 
your great Master Supreme, you shall have every kind of 
blessedness. 
 
 
 
266
