===== PAGE 1 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita aA

RR

) God Talks With Arjuna

THE
BHAGAVAD

The immortal dialogue between
soul and Spirit
A new translation and commentary

PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA



===== PAGE 2 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

PRAISE FOR PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA’S COMMENTARY
ON THE BHAGAVAD GITA...

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita—A New Translation and
Commentary
(published by Self-Realization Fellowship, 1995)

“Yogananda’s commentary penetrates to the heart of the Bhagavad
Gita to reveal the deep spiritual and psychological truths lying at the heart
of this great Hindu text.”—Publishers Weekly

“One of the finest works on the subject...a masterpiece of spiritual, lit-
erary and philosophical work.”—India Post

“This lavish two-volume edition...is a delight for the eye and the
heart...a testimony to [Yogananda’s] extraordinary understanding, spring-
ing from direct experience of the higher realities, and also his compassion
for seekers thirsting for spiritual truth....Experience the true pulse of the
Bhagavad Gita and be pulled into its sphere of influence through the lumi-
nous words of one of this century’s great yoga masters.” — Yoga Journal

“A flower of great beauty has risen from the writings and tradition of
Paramahansa Yogananda...he brings the Bhagavad Gita into immediate
focus for modern times....Most highly recommended!”— Leading Edge
Review

“This monumental translation and commentary on the Bhagavad Gita,
by one of India’s illustrious saints, breaks new ground....Yogananda
explores the science of yoga encrypted in the Gita...and the way this
ancient discipline makes possible the direct experience of God. In simple
but eloquent language, he sets forth a sweeping chronicle.”— The Quest

“Each verse is meticulously translated by Yogananda, but it is [his]
explanations drawing on a vast array of knowledge that is the main attrac-
tion here....An impressive panorama of wisdom, of psychology, spirit,
epistemology, physiology and yoga doctrine...Stunning.”— The Book
Reader


===== PAGE 3 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita

Paramahansa Yogananda

(January 5, 1893 — March 7, 1952)

aA



===== PAGE 4 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita

God Talks With Arjuna

THE
BHAGAVAD

GITA

Royal Science
of God-Realization

The immortal dialogue between soul and Spirit
A new translation and commentary

Paramahansa Yogananda

o

at Sel} Realiza sion Fellowahip >

aA


===== PAGE 5 / 36 =====

Copyright © 1995, 1999 Self-Realization Fellowship
All rights in this digital edition of God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita
are reserved by Self-Realization Fellowship.

NOTE TO THE READER

Subject only to any conditions established by the distributor from which
you obtained this book, Self-Realization Fellowship welcomes you to
download this edition onto any number of your own devices for your indi-
vidual, non-commercial use; and to print excerpts for your own reference.

Kindly note, however, that upon acquiring this edition the reader agrees to
abide by applicable national and international copyright laws; and to
abstain from distributing, reproducing, or transmitting the contents to
other individuals or entities, by any means (electronic, mechanical, or oth-
erwise) without the publisher’s prior written consent. We appreciate your
cooperation in respecting the author’s work and in helping to preserve its
integrity by upholding these principles.

Thank you for supporting our non-profit publishing endeavors in connec-
tion with the legacy of Paramahansa Yogananda.

We acknowledge with appreciation the work of the artists Mr. V. V. Sapar
and Sapar Brothers, under the supervision of Mr. B. D. Vyas, who created
the paintings in this publication under exclusive commission by Self-Real-
ization Fellowship according to designs originated by the publisher.

Acknowledgments for quoted material appear here.

Authorized by the International Publications Council of
SELF-REALIZATION FELLOWSHIP
3880 San Rafael Avenue
Los Angeles, California 90065-3219

The Self-Realization Fellowship name and emblem (shown above) appear
on all SRF books, recordings, and other publications, as an assurance that a

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ


===== PAGE 6 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

work originates with the society establisehd by Paramahansa Yogananda
and faithfully conveys his teachings.

Second edition, 1999. Ebook edition, 2018.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 95-71657
ISBN: 978-0-87612-030-9 (hardcover)

ISBN: 978-0-87612-031-6 (paperback)

ISBN: 978-0-87612-779-7 (Kindle edition)
ISBN: 978-0-87612-780-3 (ePub edition)


===== PAGE 7 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ

THE SPIRITUAL LEGACY OF PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA

His Complete Writings, Lectures, and Informal Talks

Paramahansa Yogananda founded Self-Realization Fellowship in 1920
to disseminate his teachings worldwide and to preserve their purity and
integrity for generations to come. A prolific writer and lecturer from his
earliest years in America, he created a renowned and voluminous body of
works on the yoga science of meditation, the art of balanced living, and the
underlying unity of all great religions. Today this unique and far-reaching
spiritual legacy lives on, inspiring millions of truth-seekers all over the
world.

In accord with the express wishes of the great master, Self-Realization
Fellowship has continued the ongoing task of publishing and keeping per-
manently in print The Complete Works of Paramahansa Yogananda. These
include not only the final editions of all the books he published during his
lifetime, but also many new titles—works that had remained unpublished
at the time of his passing in 1952, or which had been serialized over the
years in incomplete form in Self-Realization Fellowship’s magazine, as
well as hundreds of profoundly inspiring lectures and informal talks
recorded but not printed before his passing.

Paramahansa Yogananda personally chose and trained those close dis-
ciples who formed the Self-Realization Fellowship Publications Council,
giving them specific guidelines for the preparation and publishing of his
teachings. The members of the SRF Publications Council (monks and nuns
who have taken lifelong vows of renunciation and selfless service) honor
these guidelines as a sacred trust, in order that the universal message of
this beloved world teacher will live on in its original power and
authenticity.

The Self-Realization Fellowship emblem (shown above) was desig-
nated by Paramahansa Yogananda to identify the nonprofit society he


===== PAGE 8 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

founded as the authorized source of his teachings. The SRF name and
emblem appear on all Self-Realization Fellowship publications and record-
ings, assuring the reader that a work originates with the organization
founded by Paramahansa Yogananda and conveys his teachings as he him-
self intended they be given.

— SELF-REALIZATION FELLOWSHIP


===== PAGE 9 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A AQ

CONTENTS

List of Illustrations
Preface, by Sri Daya Mata
Introduction

I: THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA
The Significance of Chapter I
“What Did They?”—Survey of the Inner Psychological and Spiritual Battlefield
The Opposing Armies of the Spiritual and Materialistic Forces
The Conch Shells: Inner Vibratory Battle in Meditation
The Devotee Observes the Enemies to Be Destroyed
Arjuna’s Refusal to Fight

I

—

: SANKHYA AND YOGA: Cosmic WISDOM AND THE MeTHop oF Its ATTAINMENT
The Lord’s Exhortation to the Devotee, and the Devotee’s Plea for Guidance
The Eternal, Transcendental Nature of the Soul
The Righteous Battle Is Man’s Religious Duty
Yoga: Remedy for Doubt, Confusion, and Intellectual Dissatisfaction
The Yoga Art of Right Action That Leads to Infinite Wisdom
Qualities of the Self-realized

TII: Karma YoGa: THE PATH OF SPIRITUAL ACTION
Why Is Activity a Necessary Part of the Path to Liberation?
The Nature of Right Action: Performing All Works as Oblations (Yajna)
Righteous Duty, Performed With Nonattachment, Is Godly

How Egoless Action Frees the Yogi From Nature’s Dualities and the Bondage of
Karma

Right Attitude Toward One’s Spiritual Guide and Sadhana
Conquering the Two-sided Passion, Desire and Anger

IV: THE SUPREME SCIENCE OF KNOWING GoD
The Historical Basis and Esoteric Essence of Yoga
The Incarnations of the Divine
Paths of Liberation From the Rounds of Rebirth
The Lord’s Modes of Action Within His Creation
Freedom From Karma: The Nature of Right Action, Wrong Action, and Inaction
Yajna, the Spiritual Fire Rite That Consumes All Karma
The All-sanctifying Wisdom, Imparted by a True Guru


===== PAGE 10 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A AQ

V: FREEDOM THROUGH INNER RENUNCIATION
Which Is Better—Serving in the World or Seeking Wisdom in Seclusion?
The Gita’s Way of Freedom: Meditation on God Plus Desireless Activity
The Self as Transcendental Witness: Ensconced in Bliss, Unaffected by the World
Good and Evil and Their Relation to the Soul
The Knower of Spirit Abides in the Supreme Being
Transcending the Sensory World, Attaining the Bliss Indestructible

VI: PERMANENT SHELTER IN SPIRIT THROUGH YOGA MEDITATION
True Renunciation and True Yoga Depend on Meditation
Transforming the Little Self (Ego) Into the Divine Self (Soul)
How the Sage of Self-realization Views the World
Krishna’s Advice for Successful Practice of Yoga
Attaining Self-Mastery and Control of the Mind
Mergence of the Self in Spirit, Pervading All Beings
The Lord’s Promise: The Persevering Yogi Ultimately Is Victorious

VII: THe Nature OF SPIRIT AND THE SPIRIT OF NATURE
“Hear How Thou Shalt Realize Me”
Prakriti: The Dual Nature of Spirit in Creation
How the Creator Sustains the Manifested Creation
Cosmic Hypnosis (Maya) and the Way to Transcend It
Which “God” Should Be Worshiped?
Perceiving the Spirit Behind the Dream-Shadows of Nature

VIII: THe ImMpPErisHABLE ABSOLUTE: BEYOND THE CYCLES OF CREATION AND
DIssOLUTION
The Manifestations of Spirit in the Macrocosm and Microcosm
The Yogi’s Experience at the Time of Death
The Method of Attaining the Supreme
The Cycles of Cosmic Creation
The Way of Release From the Cycles of Rebirth

IX: THE RoyAL KNOWLEDGE, THE RoyYAL Mystery
Direct Perception of God, Through Methods of Yoga “Easy to Perform”
How the Lord Pervades All Creation, Yet Remains Transcendent
The Right Method of Worshiping God

X: THE INFINITE MANIFESTATIONS OF THE UNMANIFEST SPIRIT


===== PAGE 11 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A AQ

The Unborn and Beginningless, Beyond Form and Conception
The Diverse Modifications of God’s Nature
In Joy and Devotion, the Wise Adore Him

The Devotee Prays to Hear From the Lips of the Lord Himself: “What Are Thy
Many Aspects and Forms?”
“J Will Tell Thee of My Phenomenal Expressions”

XI: VisION oF VISIONS: THE LorD REVEALS His Cosmic Form

XII: BHakti YOGA: UNION THROUGH DEVOTION
Should the Yogi Worship the Unmanifest, or a Personal God?
The Levels of Spiritual Practice and the Stages of Realization
Qualities of the Devotee, Endearing to God

XIII: THE FIELD AND THE KNOWER OF THE FIELD

The Divine Forces That Create the Body, the Field Where Good and Evil Are
Sown and Reaped

The True Nature of Matter and Spirit, Body and Soul
Characteristics of Wisdom

Spirit, as Known by the Wise

Purusha and Prakriti (Spirit and Nature)

Three Approaches to Self-realization

Liberation: Differentiating Between the Field and Its Knower

XIV: TRANSCENDING THE GUNAS
The Three Qualities (Gunas) Inherent in Cosmic Nature
Mixture of Good and Evil in Human Nature
The Fruits of the Sattvic, Rajasic, and Tamasic Life
The Nature of the Jivanmukta—One Who Rises Above Nature’s Qualities

XV: PuRUSHOTTAMA: THE UTTERMOST BEING
Eternal Ashvattha: The Tree of Life
The Abode of the Unmanifest
How Spirit Manifests as the Soul
The Supreme Spirit: Beyond the Perishable and the Imperishable

XVI: EMBRACING THE DIVINE AND SHUNNING THE DEMONIC
The Soul Qualities That Make Man Godlike
The Nature and Fate of Souls Who Shun the Divine
The Threefold Gate of Hell


===== PAGE 12 / 36 =====

<= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita aA @

The Right Understanding of Scriptural Guidance for the Conduct of Life

XVII: THREE KInDs oF FAITH
Three Patterns of Worship
Three Classes of Food
Three Grades of Spiritual Practices
Three Kinds of Giving
Aum-Tat-Sat: God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost

XVIII: “In TrutH Do I Promise THEE: THou SHALT ATTAIN Me”

Renunciation: The Divine Art of Acting in the World With Unselfishness and
Nonattachment

The Roots of Action and the Consummation of Action (Liberation)

Three Grades of Knowledge, Action, and Character

Intelligence (Buddhi), Fortitude (Dhriti), and Happiness (Sukham): Their Higher
and Lower Expressions

Discerning One’s Divinely Ordained Duty in Life

Summary of the Gita’s Message

The Dialogue Between Spirit and Soul Concludes

ADDENDA

Afterword, by Sri Daya Mata

Ode to the Bhagavad Gita, by Paramahansa Yogananda
Transliteration and Pronunciation of Sanskrit Terms
Epithets of Lord Krishna and Arjuna

Lahiri Mahasaya’s Diagram of Chakras

About the Author

Aims and Ideals of Self-Realization Fellowship
Self-Realization Fellowship Publications and Lessons
Terms Associated With Self-Realization Fellowship
Notes


===== PAGE 13 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A AQ

ILLUSTRATIONS

Paramahansa Yogananda (frontispiece)
Bhagavan Krishna as a child in Brindaban

Chart: Chronology of creation, symbolized in genealogy of the Kurus and
Pandus

Bodily Kingdom as ruled by King Soul

Bodily Kingdom as ruled by King Delusive Ego

The blind King Dhritarashtra asked: “What did they, O Sanjaya?”
Sri Krishna with the Pandava princes and Kunti and Draupadi

The chariot of meditative consciousness

The soul's journey at the time of bodily death

“Be a yogi by uniting yourself to My blessed presence in your soul”
Arjuna and Duryodhana seeking Sri Krishna’s aid in battle

At the court of Sri Krishna

Sri Krishna proposing peaceful compromise to Duryodhana at Kurus’ palace
The Pandavas and Draupadi retire to the Himalayas

Bhagavan Krishna as Yogeshvara, “Lord of Yoga”

Yoga meditation: the esoteric fire-rite (yajna) of union with Spirit
The meditating yogi’s unwavering perception of the Divine

“He who perceives Me everywhere...”

Prakriti, Cosmic Mother Nature, and Her universal work of creation
“A devotional offering acceptable in My sight”

Arjuna beholding the Cosmic Vision

Sri Krishna instructs Arjuna about the three gunas, qualities, of Nature
Bhagavan Krishna and Arjuna on the field of Kurukshetra

Sage Vyasa, author of the Bhagavad Gita

Diagram of chakras by Lahiri Mahasaya

Paramahansa Yogananda, 1950


===== PAGE 14 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

INTRODUCTION

THE BHAGAVAD GITA IS THE MOST beloved scripture of India, a scripture of
scriptures. It is the Hindu’s Holy Testament, or Bible, the one book that all
masters depend upon as a supreme source of scriptural authority. Bhagavad
Gita means “Song of the Spirit,” the divine communion of truth-realization
between man and his Creator, the teachings of Spirit through the soul, that
should be sung unceasingly.

The pantheistic doctrine of the Gita is that God is everything. Its verses
celebrate the discovery of the Absolute, Spirit beyond creation, as being
also the hidden Essence of all manifestation. Nature, with her infinite vari-
ety and inexorable laws, is an evolute of the Singular Reality through a
cosmic delusion: maya, the “Magical Measurer” that makes the One appear
as many embracing their own individuality—forms and intelligences exist-
ing in apparent separation from their Creator. Just as a dreamer differenti-
ates his one consciousness into many dream beings in a dream world, so
God, the Cosmic Dreamer, has separated His consciousness into all the
cosmic manifestations, with souls individualized from His own One Being
endowed with the egoity to dream their personalized existences within the
Nature-ordained drama of the Universal Dream.

The main theme throughout the Gita is that one
The main theme Should be an adherent of sannyasa, a renouncer of this
of the Bhagavad  egoity ingrained through avidya, ignorance, within the
‘Gilt ; physical self of man. By renunciation of all desires

* springing from the ego and its environments, which

cause separateness between ego and Spirit; and by

reunion with the Cosmic Dreamer through ecstatic yoga meditation,

samadhi, man detaches himself from and ultimately dissolves the compel-

lent forces of Nature that perpetuate the delusive dichotomy of the Self

and Spirit. In samadhi, the cosmic dream delusion terminates and the ecsta-

tic dream being awakens in oneness with the pure cosmic consciousness of
the Supreme Being—ever-existing, ever-conscious, ever-new Bliss.

This God-realization cannot be attained merely by reading a book, but
only by dwelling every day on the above truth that life is a variety enter-

eS
2


===== PAGE 15 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

tainment of dream movies full of the hazards of duality—villains of evil
and heroic adventures with goodness; and by deep yoga meditation, unit-
ing human consciousness with God’s cosmic consciousness. Thus does the
Gita exhort the seeker to right action—physical, mental, and spiritual—
toward this goal. We came from God and our ultimate destiny is to return
to Him. The end and the means to the end is yoga, the timeless science of
God-union.

So comprehensive as a spiritual guide is the Gita that it is declared to
be the essence of the ponderous four Vedas, 108 Upanishads, and the six
systems of Hindu philosophy. Only by intuitive study and understanding
of these tomes, or else by contacting Cosmic Consciousness, can one fully
comprehend the Bhagavad Gita. Indeed, the underlying essential truths of
all great world scriptures can find common amity in the infinite wisdom of
the Gita’s mere 700 concise verses.

The entire knowledge of the cosmos is packed into the Gita. Supremely
profound, yet couched in revelatory language of solacing beauty and sim-
plicity, the Gita has been understood and applied on all levels of human
endeavor and spiritual striving—sheltering a vast spectrum of human
beings with their disparate natures and needs. Wherever one is on the way
back to God, the Gita will shed its light on that segment of the journey.

ART REVEALS THE MIND of a people—a crude arrow draw-
ing suggests a crude mind—but the literature of a civi-

SS

HIsTorRICAL
lization is a much finer indication of a culture.
ORIGIN OF : . : ; : .
Literature is the index of the mind of a nation. India
THE GITA

has preserved in her literature her highly evolved civi-
lization dating back to a glorious golden age. From the undated antiquity
in which the Vedas first emerged, through a grand unfoldment of subse-
quent exalted verse and prose, the Hindus have left their civilization not in
stone monoliths or crumbling edifices, but in architecture of ornamental
writing sculpted in the euphonious language of Sanskrit. The very compo-
sition of the Bhagavad Gita—its rhetoric, alliteration, diction, style, and
harmony—shows that India had long since passed through states of mate-
rial and intellectual growth and had arrived at a lofty peak of spirituality.’
The age and authorship of the Gita, as with so many of India’s ancient
writings and scriptures, remains an engaging subject of intellectual and


===== PAGE 16 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

scholarly research and dispute. Its verses are found in the sixth of eighteen
books that constitute India’s great epic poem, the Mahabharata, in the
Bhishma Parva, sections 23-40. In 100,000 couplets this hoary epic—per-
haps the longest poem in world literature—recounts the history of the
descendants of King Bharata, the Pandavas and Kauravas, cousins whose
dispute over a kingdom was the cause of the cataclysmic war of Kuruk-
shetra. The Bhagavad Gita, a sacred dialogue on yoga between Bhagavan
Krishna—who was at once an earthly king and a divine incarnation—and
his chief disciple, the Pandava prince Arjuna, purportedly takes place on
the eve of this fearsome war.

The authorship of the Mahabharata, including the Gita portion, is tradi-
tionally assigned to the illumined sage Vyasa, whose date is not definitely
known.” It is said that the Vedic rishis manifested their immortality by
appearing before mankind in different ages to play some role for man’s
spiritual upliftment. Thus they appeared and reappeared at various times
throughout the extensive period of time encompassed by the revelation of
the scriptures of India, a phenomenon confounding to any scholar who
relies on facts rather than faith in an unenlightened age in which man has
learned to use hardly ten percent of his brain capacity, and that quite awk-
wardly for the most part. Whether these immortals retain their physical
forms like Mahavatar Babaji (as recounted in Autobiography of a Yogi), or
remain immersed in Spirit, they emerge from time to time in some tangible
expression to man.

So long as divine beings are in a state of absolute oneness with Spirit,
as was Sage Vyasa, they cannot record in writing their indescribable spiri-
tual perceptions. Such Self-realized souls have to come down from the
state of Spirit-oneness, which is unalloyed by duality, to the state of human
consciousness, which is governed by the law of relativity, in order to bring
truth to mankind. When the little soul is blessed to merge with the vast
ocean of blissful Spirit, it takes care not to lose its identity if it wants to
come back and chronicle its experiences of the Infinite for the enlighten-
ment of the world.

Tradition involves Vyasa in many literary works, primarily as an
arranger of the four Vedas, for which he is referred to as Vedavyasa; com-
piler of Puranas, sacred books illustrating Vedic knowledge through histor-


===== PAGE 17 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

ical and legendary tales of ancient India’s avatars, saints and sages, kings
and heroes; and author of the epic Mahabharata, which purportedly was
accomplished nonstop in two and a half of his latter years spent in
secluded retirement in the Himalayas. He not only authored the Mahab-
harata and its sacred Gita discourse, but showed himself throughout play-
ing a significant role of involvement in the events and affairs of the
Pandavas and Kauravas. Indeed, he is the paternal origin of these chief
characters through the two sons he sired, Pandu and Dhritarashtra.

The Gita is generally conceded to predate the Christian era. The testi-
mony of the Mahabharata itself is that the Kurukshetra war took place
toward the end of Dwapara Yuga, when the world was on the verge of
descending into the Dark Age or Kali Yuga. (The yugas, or world cycles,
are explained in the commentary on IV:1.) Traditionally, many Hindus
have fixed the beginning of the last descending Kali Yuga at 3102 B.c., thus
placing the Kurukshetra war described in the Mahabharata a few decades
prior to this.° Scholars of East and West have advanced various dates for
the Mahabharata events—some basing their estimates on archaeological
evidence and others on references in the poem to specific astronomical
phenomena such as eclipses, solstices, positions of stars, and planetary
conjunctions. By these means, the dates proposed for the Kurukshetra war
range from as early as 6000 B.c. to as recently as 500 B.c.—hardly a definite
consensus!*

There is no effort or presumption in this publication to add to the work
of scholarly researchers and commentators who have labored long and
studiously to label and categorize such data dear to historians as author-
ship, time frames, and factuality of names, places, and events. These have
their necessary place in the world library of knowledge, whether specula-
tive or proven. My only purpose is to speak of the exoteric and esoteric—
material and spiritual—message of the Bhagavad Gita based on the form
and tradition in which it has been handed down to us from the archives of
timeless truth by God-knowing sages. What may defy definitive scrutiny
in one generation may prove to be quite commonplace in higher ages that
mirror those more enlightened times in which such scriptures originated.

The ancient sacred writings do not clearly distinguish history from
symbology; rather, they often intermix the two in the tradition of scriptural


===== PAGE 18 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ

RS
2

revelation. Prophets would pick up instances of the

Gita as history €Veryday life and events of their times and from them

and as spiritual draw similes to express subtle spiritual truths. Divine

allegory profundities would not otherwise be conceivable by the

* ordinary man unless defined in common terms. When,

as they often did, scriptural prophets wrote in more

recondite metaphors and allegories, it was to conceal from ignorant, spiri-

tually unprepared minds the deepest revelations of Spirit. Thus, in a lan-

guage of simile, metaphor, and allegory, the Bhagavad Gita was very

cleverly written by Sage Vyasa by interweaving historical facts with psy-

chological and spiritual truths, presenting a word-painting of the tumul-

tuous inner battles that must be waged by both the material and the

spiritual man. In the hard shell of symbology, he hid the deepest spiritual

meanings to protect them from the devastation of the ignorance of the

Dark Ages toward which civilization was descending concurrent with the
end of Sri Krishna’s incarnation on earth.

Historically, on the brink of such a horrendous war as that related in
the Mahabharata, it is most unlikely that, as the Gita depicts, Krishna and
Arjuna would draw their chariot into the open field between the two
opposing armies at Kurukshetra and there engage in an extensive dis-
course on yoga. While many of the chief events and persons in the com-
pendious Mahabharata indeed have their basis in historical fact, their poetic
presentation in the epic has been arranged conveniently and meaningfully
(and wonderfully condensed in the Bhagavad Gita portion) for the pri-
mary purpose of setting forth the essence of India’s Sanatana Dharma, Eter-
nal Religion.

In interpreting scripture, one must not, therefore, ignore the factual and
historical elements in which the truth was couched. One must distinguish
between an ordinary illustration of a moral doctrine or recounting of a
spiritual phenomenon and that of a deeper esoteric intent. One has to
know how to recognize the signs of the convergence of material illustra-
tions with spiritual doctrines without trying to drag a hidden meaning out
of everything. One must know how to intuit the cues and express declara-
tions of the author and never fetch out meanings not intended, misled by
enthusiasm and the imaginative habit of trying to squeeze spiritual signifi-


===== PAGE 19 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

cance from every word or statement.
The true way to understand scripture is through intuition, attuning
oneself to the inner realization of truth.

My GuRU AND PARAMGURUS—Swami Sri Yukteswar,
Lahiri Mahasaya, and Mahavatar Babaji—are rishis of

as

ANEW RE this present age, masters who themselves are God-real-
ENOMINS ized living scriptures. They have bequeathed to the
(Gin GER WEE world—along with the long-lost scientific technique of
MopERN Kriya Yoga—a new revelation of the holy Bhagavad
‘era Gita, relevant primarily to the science of yoga and to

Kriya Yoga in particular.”

Mahavatar Babaji, at one with Krishna in Spirit, through his grace intu-
itively transferred the true knowledge of the Bhagavad Gita to his disciple
Lahiri Mahasaya—a Yogavatar, “Incarnation of Yoga”—through whom he
revived for mankind the Kriya Yoga science as the technique of salvation
for this age. Lahiri Mahasaya himself never wrote any books, but his
divine expositions of the scriptures were expressed through the writings of
various of his advanced disciples. Among his greatest disciples, Swami Sri
Yukteswar, Swami Pranabananda, and Panchanon Bhattacharya recorded
his Gita explanations. The earliest small edition of the Bhagavad Gita with
Lahiri Mahasaya’s interpretation was brought out by Panchanon Bhat-
tacharya, founder of the Arya Mission Institution, Calcutta. Later, my guru
Sri Yukteswarji—a Jnanavatar, “Incarnation of Wisdom”—in his elaborate
unrivaled way, explained the most significant first nine chapters of the
Gita according to Lahiri Mahasaya’s interpretation.

After that, the great Swami Pranabananda, “the saint with two bodies”
(about whom I have written in my Autobiography of a Yogi), brought forth
an amazing interpretation of Lahiri Mahasaya’s interpretation of the entire
Gita. The eminent yogi, Bhupendra Nath Sanyal, whom I personally
highly regard, also brought out a remarkable edition of Lahiri Mahasaya’s
interpretation of the Gita. I have had the blessing to be inspired in the
greatest way about Lahiri Mahasaya’s divine insight and perceptive
method of explaining the Gita, which I learned first from my Master.

Through the help of a God-realized guru, one learns how to use the
nutcracker of intuitive perception to crack open the hard shell of language


===== PAGE 20 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

and ambiguity to get at the kernels of truth in scriptural sayings. My guru,
Swami Sri Yukteswar, never permitted me to read with mere theoretical
interest any stanza of the Bhagavad Gita (or the aphorisms of Patanjali,
India’s greatest exponent of Yoga). Master made me meditate on the scrip-
tural truths until I became one with them; then he would discuss them
with me.° Once when in my enthusiasm I hurried Master to teach me
faster, he sharply rebuked me: “Go and finish reading the Gita; why come
to study it with me?” When I became calm, having stilled my intellectual
eagerness, he told me to put myself in rapport with God as manifested in
Krishna, Arjuna, and Vyasa when the message of the Gita was revealed
through them.

In this way, during those precious years in the blessed company of
Master, he gave to me the key to unlock the mystery of scripture. (It was
from him I also learned how to put myself in tune with Christ to interpret
his sayings as he wanted them to be understood.) Master’s example was
his guru, Lahiri Mahasaya. When disciples and students sought instruc-
tion from the Yogavatar, he used to close his eyes and read aloud from the
book of his soul-realization. Sri Yukteswar did the same; and that method
is what he taught to me. I am grateful to Master for this, for within the soul
is a source of infinite realization, which I could not have gleaned in all my
life from intellectual study. Now when I touch my pen, or look within and
speak, it comes in boundless waves.

Master also taught me the specific symbology in just the first few
verses of Chapter I of the Gita and a few related aphorisms of Patanjali.
When he saw that I had mastered these through his instruction and my
unfolding intuitive perception born of meditation, he declined to teach me
further. Early on, he had foretold my work to interpret the Gita. Master
said to me: “You don’t want to understand and explain the Gita according
to your own concepts or with the twistings of the intellect. You want to
interpret to the world the actual dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna as
perceived by Vyasa and revealed to you.”

This Bhagavad Gita that I offer to the world, God Talks With Arjuna, is a
spiritual commentary of the communion that takes place between the
omnipresent Spirit (symbolized by Krishna) and the soul of the ideal devo-
tee (represented by Arjuna). I arrived at the spiritual understanding


===== PAGE 21 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita aA

4

Their thoughts fully on Me, their beings surrendered to Me, enlighten-
ing one another, proclaiming Me always, My devotees are contented
and joyful.

—Bhagavad Gita X:9

BS
&

“As often as virtue declines, a God-illumined soul comes on earth to draw
virtue again to the fore....

“As a child in Brindaban, Krishna amazed all with his precocious wisdom
and display of incredible powers....Beautiful in form and feature, irresistible in
charm and demeanor, an embodiment of divine love, giving joy to all, the
young boy Krishna was beloved of everyone in the community, and an
entrancing leader and friend to his childhood companions, the gopas and
gopis, who with him tended the village herds of cows in the sylvan envi-
rons....Sri Krishna, with the enchanting melodies of his heavenly flute, is call-
ing all devotees to the bower of divine union in samadhi meditation, there to
bask in the blissful love of God.”

Q

A


===== PAGE 22 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A @

CHAPTER

THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA

%

The Significance of Chapter I

&

“What Did They?”—Survey of the Inner Psychological and
Spiritual Battlefield

&

The Opposing Armies of the Spiritual and Materialistic Forces

ee
oo

The Conch Shells: Inner Vibratory Battle in Meditation

RS
&

The Devotee Observes the Enemies to Be Destroyed

R
%

Arjuna’s Refusal to Fight

>

0

“The timeless message of the Bhagavad Gita does not refer only to one historical
battle, but to the cosmic conflict between good and evil: life as a series of battles
between Spirit and matter, soul and body, life and death, knowledge and igno-
rance, health and disease, changelessness and transitoriness, self-control and
temptations, discrimination and the blind sense-mind.”


===== PAGE 23 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

CHAPTER I
THE DESPONDENCY OF ARJUNA
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF CHAPTER I

As A PREEMINENT TREATISE ON YoGA, the renowned Bhagavad Gita speaks
both pragmatically and esoterically to embrace the broad spectrum of
human seeking that has for generations sheltered itself in the counsel and
solace found in the verses of this beloved scripture. It cites not only the
practical application of spiritual principles required of the aspirant, but
also the consummate expression of those principles as realized by the
advanced yogi.

In modern books, the Introduction usually gives the reader a general
idea of the contents; but the Hindu scriptural writers of ancient India often
used the first chapter instead to indicate their purpose. Thus the opening
chapter of the Bhagavad Gita serves as an introduction to the holy dis-
course that follows. But it does not merely set the scene and provide a
backdrop, to be lightly perused as insubstantial. When read as the allegory
intended by its author, the great sage Vyasa, it introduces the basic princi-
ples of the science of Yoga and describes the initial spiritual struggles of
the yogi who sets out on the path to kaivalya, liberation, oneness with God:
the goal of Yoga. To understand the implied truths in the first chapter is to
begin the yoga journey with a clearly charted course.

My revered guru, Swami Sri Yukteswar—himself a Jnanavatar, incarna-
tion of wisdom—taught me the hidden meaning in just a few significant
verses from the first Gita chapter. “You now have the key,” he said. “With
calm inner perception, you will be able to open this scripture to any pas-
sage and understand both its substance and its essence.” It is with his
encouragement and by his grace that I offer this work.

“WHAT Dip THEY?”—SURVEY OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
AND SPIRITUAL BATTLEFIELD


===== PAGE 24 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ

VERSE 1

dhrtarastra uvaca
dharmaksetre kuruksetre samaveta yuyutsavah
mamakah pandavas caiva kim akurvata sartjaya

Dhritarashtra said:

On the holy plain of Kurukshetra (dharmakshetra kurukshetra),
when my offspring and the sons of Pandu had gathered together,
eager for battle, what did they, O Sanjaya?

THE BLIND KING DuriTARAsHTRA (the blind mind) enquired through the hon-
est Sanjaya (impartial introspection): “When my offspring, the Kurus (the
wicked impulsive mental and sense tendencies), and the sons of the virtu-
ous Pandu (the pure discriminative tendencies) gathered together on the
dharmakshetra (holy plain) of Kurukshetra (the bodily field of activity),
eager to do battle for supremacy, what was the outcome?”

The earnest enquiry by the blind King Dhri-
Metaphorical signifi tarashtra, seeking an unbiased report from the
cance of Dhritarash- impartial Sanjaya as to how fared the battle between
tra’s pene the Kurus and the Pandavas (sons of Pandu) at

. Kurukshetra, is metaphorically the question to be

asked by the spiritual aspirant as he reviews daily the events of his own
righteous battle from which he seeks the victory of Self-realization.
Through honest introspection he analyzes the deeds and assesses the
strengths of the opposing armies of his good and bad tendencies: self-con-
trol versus sense indulgence, discriminative intelligence opposed by men-
tal sense inclinations, spiritual resolve in meditation contested by mental
resistance and physical restlessness, and divine soul-consciousness against
the ignorance and magnetic attraction of the lower ego-nature.

The battlefield of these contending forces is Kurukshetra (Kuru, from
the Sanskrit root kri, “work, material action’; and ksetra, “field’”). This
“field of action” is the human body with its physical, mental, and soul fac-
ulties, the field on which all activities of one’s life take place. It is referred
to in this Gita stanza as Dharmakshetra (dharma, i.e., righteousness, virtue,
holiness; thus, holy plain or field), for on this field the righteous battle is

%
x


===== PAGE 25 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

waged between the virtues of the soul’s discriminative intelligence (sons
of Pandu) and the ignoble, uncontrolled activities of the blind mind (the
Kurus, or offspring of the blind King Dhritarashtra).

Dharmakshetra Kurukshetra refers also, respectively, to religious and
spiritual duties and activities (those of the yogi in meditation) as con-
trasted with mundane responsibilities and activities. Thus, in this deeper
metaphysical interpretation, Dharmakshetra Kurukshetra signifies the
inner bodily field on which the spiritual action of yoga meditation takes
place for the attainment of Self-realization: the plain of the cerebrospinal
axis and its seven subtle centers of life and divine consciousness.
Competing on this field are two opposing forces

Two opposing forces: OF Magnetic poles: discriminative intelligence (bud-

inclinations of the dhi) and the sense-conscious mind (manas). Buddhi,

psi mind vs. soul the pure discriminating intellect, is allegorically rep-

Seriminallon resented as Pandu, husband of Kunti (the mother of

Arjuna and the other Pandava princes who uphold
the righteous principles of nivritti, renunciation of worldliness). The name
Pandu derives from pand, “white’”—a metaphorical implication of the clar-
ity of a pure discriminating intellect. Manas is allegorically represented as
the blind King Dhritarashtra, sire of the one hundred Kurus, or sensory
impressions and inclinations, which are all bent toward pravritti, worldly
enjoyment. Buddhi draws its right discernment from the superconscious-
ness of the soul manifesting in the causal seats of consciousness in the spir-
itual cerebrospinal centers. Manas, the sense mind, the subtle magnetic
pole turned outward toward the world of matter, is in the pons Varolii,
which physiologically is ever busy with sensory coordination.! Thus, bud-
dhi intelligence draws the consciousness toward truth or the eternal reali-
ties, soul consciousness or Self-realization. Manas or sense mind repels the
consciousness from truth and engages it in the external sensory activities
of the body, and thus with the world of delusive relativities, maya.

The name Dhritarashtra derives from dhrta, “held, supported, drawn
tight (reins),” and rastra, “kingdom,” from raj, “to rule.” By implication,
we have the symbolic meaning, dhrtam rastram yena, “who upholds the
kingdom (of the senses),” or “who rules by holding tightly the reins (of the
senses).”

RS
%


===== PAGE 26 / 36 =====

The mind (manas, or sense consciousness) gives coordination to the
senses as the reins keep together the several horses of a chariot. The body
is the chariot; the soul is the owner of the chariot; intelligence is the chario-
teer; the senses are the horses. The mind is said to be blind because it can-
not see without the help of the senses and intelligence. The reins of a
chariot receive and relay the impulses from the steeds and the guidance of
the charioteer. Similarly, the blind mind on its own neither cognizes nor
exerts guidance, but merely receives the impressions from the senses and
relays the conclusions and instructions of the intelligence. If the intelli-
gence is governed by buddhi, the pure discriminative power, the senses are
controlled; if the intelligence is ruled by material desires, the senses are
wild and unruly.

SANJAYA MEANS, LITERALLY, completely victorious; “one who
Symbolism of has conquered himself.” He alone who is not self-cen-
Sanjaya: impar- tered has the ability to see clearly and to be impartial.
tial intuitive Thus, in the Gita, Sanjaya is divine insight; for the aspir-
es ing devotee, Sanjaya represents the power of impartial

intuitive self-analysis, discerning introspection. It is the
ability to stand aside, observe oneself without any prejudice, and judge
accurately. Thoughts may be present without one’s conscious awareness.

Introspection is that power of intuition by which the consciousness can

watch its thoughts. It does not reason, it feels—not with biased emotion,

but with clear, calm intuition.

In the Mahabharata, of which the Bhagavad Gita is a part, the text of the
Gita is introduced by the great rishi (sage) Vyasa bestowing on Sanjaya the
spiritual power of being able to see from a distance everything taking
place over the entire battlefield, so that he could give an account to the
blind King Dhritarashtra as the events unfold. Therefore, one would
expect the king’s enquiry in the first verse to be in the present tense.
Author Vyasa purposely had Sanjaya narrate the Gita dialogue retrospec-
tively, and used a past tense of the verb (“What did they?”), as a clear hint
to discerning students that the Gita is referring only incidentally to a his-
torical battle on the plain of Kurukshetra in northern India. Primarily,
Vyasa is describing a universal battle—the one that rages daily in man’s
life. Had Vyasa wished merely to report the progress of an actual battle

Ry
2

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ


===== PAGE 27 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

that was taking place at the moment on the field of Kurukshetra, he would
have had Dhritarashtra speak to the messenger Sanjaya in the present
tense: “My children and the sons of Pandu—what are they doing now?”
This is an important point. The timeless message of the Bhagavad Gita
does not refer only to one historical battle, but to the cosmic conflict
between good and evil: life as a series of battles between Spirit and matter,
soul and body, life and death, knowledge and ignorance, health and dis-
ease, changelessness and transitoriness, self-control and temptations, dis-
crimination and the blind sense-mind. The past tense of the verb in the
first stanza is therefore employed by Vyasa to indicate that the power of
one’s introspection is being invoked to review the conflicts of the day in
one’s mind in order to determine the favorable or unfavorable outcome.”

EXPANDED COMMENTARY: THE BATTLE OF LIFE

FROM THE MOMENT OF CONCEPTION to the surrender of the last breath, man has
to fight in each incarnation innumerable battles—biological, hereditary,
bacteriological, physiological, climatic, social, ethical, political, sociologi-
cal, psychological, metaphysical—so many varieties of inner and outer
conflicts. Competing for victory in every encounter are the forces of good
and evil. The whole intent of the Gita is to align man’s efforts on the side
of dharma, or righteousness. The ultimate aim is Self-realization, the real-
ization of man’s true Self, the soul, as made in the image of God, one with
the ever-existing, ever-conscious, ever-new bliss of Spirit.

The first contest of the soul in each incarnation is with other souls seek-
ing rebirth. With the union of sperm and ovum to begin the formation of a
new human body, a flash of light appears in the astral world, the heavenly
home of souls between incarnations. That light transmits a pattern which
attracts a soul according to that soul’s karma—the self-created influences
from actions of past lives. In each incarnation, karma works itself out
partly through hereditary forces; the soul of a child is attracted into a fam-
ily in which heredity is in conformance with the child’s past karma. Many
souls vie to enter this new cell of life; only one will be victorious. (In the
case of a multiple conception, more than one primal cell is present.)

Within the mother’s body, the unborn child struggles against disease,


===== PAGE 28 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

darkness, and periodic feelings of limitation and frustration as the soul
consciousness in the unborn child remembers and then gradually forgets
its greater freedom of expression during its astral sojourn. The soul within
the embryo also has to contend with karma, which is influencing for good
or ill the formation of the body in which it is now a resident. Additionally,
it encounters the vibratory influences that reach it from outside—the envi-
ronment and actions of the mother; external sounds and sensations; vibra-
tions of love and hate, peace and anger.

After birth, the struggles of the infant are between its instincts to seek
comfort and survival and the opposing relative helplessness of its imma-
ture bodily instrument.

A child begins his first conscious struggle when he has to choose
between his desires to play aimlessly and his desire to learn, study, and
pursue some course of systematic training. Gradually, more serious battles
arise, forced upon him by karmic instincts from within or by bad company
and environment from without.

The youth finds himself confronted suddenly with a host of problems
that often he has been ill-prepared to meet: temptations of sex, greed, pre-
varication, money-making by easy but questionable means, pressure from
the company he keeps, and social influences. The youth usually discovers
he possesses no sword of wisdom with which to fight the invading armies
of worldly experiences.

The adult who lives without cultivating and employing his innate
powers of wisdom and spiritual discrimination finds inexorably that the
kingdom of his body and mind is being overrun by the insurgents of mis-
ery-making wrong desires, destructive habits, failure, ignorance, disease,
and unhappiness.

Few men are even aware that a state of constant warfare exists in their
kingdom. Usually, it is only when the devastation is nearly complete that
men helplessly realize the sad ruin of their lives. The psychological conflict
for health, prosperity, self-control, and wisdom has to be started anew each
day in order for man to advance toward victory, reclaiming inch by inch
the territories of the soul occupied by the rebels of ignorance.

The yogi, the awakening man, is confronted not only with the external
battles fought by all men, but also with the internal clash between the neg-


===== PAGE 29 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita

AA

Q

A


===== PAGE 30 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

=>

0

Then also, Madhava (Krishna) and Pandava (Arjuna), seated in
their grand chariot with its yoke of white horses, splendidly blew
their celestial conch shells.

—Bhagavad Gita 1:14

eS
%

“Arjuna, seated in the chariot of meditative intuition, with his atten-
tion focused on the Spirit as Krishna or divine Christ Consciousness at
the Kutastha center between the eyebrows, beholds the light of the spiri-
tual eye and hears the sacred sound of Pranava, the creative Aum vibra-
tion with its different cosmic sounds [“conch shells”] vibrating from the
spinal centers in the astral body....

“Behold the chariot of intuition drawn by stallions of white lights
racing in all directions from a dark blue center (soul's abode)...

“Surrounding this blue light is the brilliant white or golden light—
the telescopic astral eye through which all Nature is perceived. In the cen-
ter of the blue light is a white starlike light, doorway to the Infinite Spirit,
or Cosmic Consciousness.”

“Pranava, the sound of the creative Aum vibration, is the mother of
all sounds. The intelligent cosmic energy of Aum that issues forth from
God, and is the manifestation of God, is the creator and substance of all
matter. This holy vibration is the link between matter and Spirit. Medita-
tion on Aum is the way to realize the true Spirit-essence of all creation.
By inwardly following the sound of Pranava to its source, the yogi’s con-
sciousness is carried aloft to God.”

—Paramahansa Yogananda

VERSES 15-18

paricajanyam hrstkeso devadattam dhanamtjayah
paundram dadhmau mahasankham bhimakarma vrkodarah (15)


===== PAGE 31 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita MA Q@

anantavijayam raja kuntiputro yudhisthirah
nakulah sahadevas ca sughosamanipuspakau (16)

kasyas ca paramesvasah sikhandi ca maharathah
dhrstadyumno viratas ca satyakis caparajitah (17)

drupado draupadeyas ca sarvasah prthivipate
saubhadras ca mahabahuh sankhan dadhmuh prthakprthak (18)

(15) Hrishikesha (Krishna) blew his Panchajanya; Dhananjaya
(Arjuna), his Devadatta; and Vrikodara (Bhima), of terrible
deeds, blew his great conch Paundra.

(16) King Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew his Anantavijaya;
Nakula and Sahadeva blew, respectively, their Sughosha and
Manipushpaka.

(17) The King of Kashi, excellent archer; Sikhandi, the great
warrior; Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, the invincible Satyaki,

(18) Drupada, the sons of Draupadi, and the mighty-armed son
of Subhadra, all blew their own conches, O Lord of Earth.

IN THESE VERSES REFERENCE IS MADE to the specific vibratory sounds (the
conch shells of the various Pandavas) the meditating devotee hears
emanating from the astral centers in the spine and medulla. Pranava,
the sound of the creative Aum vibration, is the mother of all sounds.
The intelligent cosmic energy of Aum that issues forth from God, and is
the manifestation of God, is the creator and substance of all matter.
This holy vibration is the link between matter and Spirit. Meditation
on Aum is the way to realize the true Spirit-essence of all creation. By
inwardly following the sound of Pranava to its source, the yogi’s con-
sciousness is carried aloft to God.

In the microcosmic universe of the body of man, the Aum vibration
works through the vital activities in the astral spinal centers of life with
their creative vibratory elements (tattvas) of earth, water, fire, air, and
ether. Through these, man’s body is created, enlivened, and sustained.


===== PAGE 32 / 36 =====

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

“As a bright light shining in the midst of darkness, so was Yogananda’s presence in this
world. Such a great soul comes on earth only rarely, when there is a real need among
men.”
—His Holiness the Shankaracharya of Kanchipuram (1894-1994), revered spir-
itual leader of millions in India

Paramahansa Yogananda was born Mukunda Lal Ghosh on Jan-
uary 5, 1893, in the north Indian city of Gorakhpur, near the Himalaya
mountains. From his earliest years, it was clear that his life was
marked for a divine destiny. According to those closest to him, even as
a child the depth of his awareness and experience of the spiritual was
far beyond the ordinary. In his youth he sought out many of India’s
sages and saints, hoping to find an illumined teacher to guide him in
his spiritual quest.

It was in 1910, at the age of seventeen, that he met and became a
disciple of the revered Swami Sri Yukteswar. In the hermitage of this
great master of yoga he spent the better part of the next ten years,
receiving Sri Yukteswar’s strict but loving spiritual discipline. After he
graduated from Calcutta University in 1915, his Guru bestowed on
him the formal vows of a monk of India’s venerable monastic Swami
Order, at which time he received the name Yogananda (signifying bliss,
ananda, through divine union, yoga).

In 1917, Sri Yogananda began his life’s work with the founding of a
“how-to-live” school for boys, where modern educational methods
were combined with yoga training and instruction in spiritual ideals.
Three years later he was invited to serve as India’s delegate to an
International Congress of Religious Liberals convening in Boston. His
address to the Congress, on “The Science of Religion,” was enthusiasti-
cally received.

For the next several years, he lectured and taught on the East Coast
and in 1924 embarked on a cross-continental speaking tour. To the tens
of thousands of Westerners who attended his talks during the decade


===== PAGE 33 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ

that followed, his words on India’s timeless wisdom were a revelation.
He emphasized the means to attain direct personal experience of God,
and taught the underlying unity of the world’s great religions—in par-
ticular that of “the original teachings of Jesus Christ and the original
Yoga taught by Bhagavan Krishna.” In Los Angeles, he began a two-
month series of lectures and classes in January of 1925. As elsewhere,
his talks were greeted with interest and acclaim. The Los Angeles Times
reported: “The Philharmonic Auditorium presents the extraordinary
spectacle of thousands...being turned away an hour before the adver-
tised opening of a lecture with the 3000-seat hall filled to its utmost
capacity.”

Later that year, Sri Yogananda established in Los Angeles the
international headquarters of Self-Realization Fellowship, the society
he had founded in 1920 to disseminate his teachings on the ancient sci-
ence and philosophy of Yoga and its time-honored Raja Yoga methods
of meditation.°

Over the next decade, he traveled extensively, speaking in major
cities throughout the country. Among those who became his students
were many prominent figures in science, business, and the arts, includ-
ing horticulturist Luther Burbank, operatic soprano Amelita Galli-Cur-
ci, George Eastman (inventor of the Kodak camera), poet Edwin
Markham, and symphony conductor Leopold Stokowski. In 1927, he
was Officially received at the White House by President Calvin
Coolidge, who had become interested in the newspaper reports of his
activities.

Paramahansaji returned to India in 1935 for a long-awaited reunion
with his guru, Sri Yukteswar. During this eighteen-month trip, he also
traveled through Europe and gave classes and lectures in London, as
well as all over India. While in his native land, he enjoyed meetings
with Mahatma Gandhi (who requested initiation in Kriya Yoga from
him), Nobel physicist Sir C. V. Raman, and some of India’s renowned
saints, including Sri Ramana Maharshi and Anandamoyi Ma.


===== PAGE 34 / 36 =====

After returning to America from India at the end of 1936, he began
to withdraw somewhat from his nationwide public lecturing so as to
devote himself to building an enduring foundation for his worldwide
work and to the writings that would carry his message to future gener-
ations. His life story, Autobiography of a Yogi, was published in 1946 and
substantially expanded by him in 1951. Recognized from the beginning
as a landmark work in its field, the book has been in print continu-
ously through Self-Realization Fellowship since its publication more
than seventy years ago.

On March 7, 1952, Paramahansa Yogananda entered mahasamadhi, a
God-illumined master’s conscious exit from the body at the time of
physical death. His passing occasioned an outpouring of reverent
appreciation from spiritual leaders, dignitaries, friends, and disciples
all over the world. The eminent Swami Sivananda, founder of the
Divine Life Society, wrote: “A rare gem of inestimable value, the like of
whom the world is yet to witness, Paramahansa Yogananda has been
an ideal representative of the ancient sages and seers, the glory of
India.” American author and educator Dr. Wendell Thomas related: “I
came to [Paramahansa] Yogananda many years ago, not as a seeker or
devotee, but as a writer with a sympathetic yet analytic and critical
approach. Happily, I found in Yoganandaji a rare combination. While
steadfast in the ancient principles of his profound faith, he had the gift
of generous adaptability....With his quick wit and great spirit he was
well fitted to promote reconciliation and truth among the religious
seekers of the world. He brought peace and joy to multitudes.”

Today, the spiritual and humanitarian work begun by Paramahansa
Yogananda is being carried on under the direction of Brother Chi-
dananda, current president of Self-Realization Fellowship / Yogoda Sat-
sanga Society of India.t In addition to publishing Paramahansa
Yogananda’s lectures, writings, and informal talks—including his Self-
Realization Fellowship Lessons, a comprehensive series for home study;
and a quarterly magazine, Self-Realization—the society guides members

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita AY Ok QQ


===== PAGE 35 / 36 =====

= God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita A QQ

in their practice of Sri Yogananda’s teachings; oversees temples,
retreats, and meditation centers around the world, as well as the Self-
Realization Fellowship monastic communities;? and coordinates the
Worldwide Prayer Circle, which serves as an instrument to help bring
healing to those in physical, mental, or spiritual need and greater har-
mony among the nations.

On the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of Paramahansa
Yogananda’s passing, his far-reaching contributions to the spiritual
upliftment of humanity were given formal recognition by the Govern-
ment of India. A special commemorative stamp was issued in his hon-
or, together with a tribute that read, in part:

“The ideal of love for God and service to humanity found full
expression in the life of Paramahansa Yogananda....Though the major
part of his life was spent outside India, still he takes his place among
our great saints. His work continues to grow and shine ever more
brightly, drawing people everywhere on the path of the pilgrimage of
the Spirit.”


===== PAGE 36 / 36 =====

VEE NOV Adi NGO Loa NOY Ao NWO Ao ou aan es

BAEAVTIAATEZOAC EAN

+

God Talks With Arjuna: The Bhagavad Gita

+
$
¢

=
:

PARAMAHANSA YOGANANDA
At Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine, 1950
