===== PAGE 1 / 131 =====

i
Handbook of 
Krishna Consciousness


===== PAGE 2 / 131 =====

ii
Handbook of Krishna Consciousness
[Total Pages : 6 + 125 = 131; 1/16 Demy Size]
Readers interested in the subject matter of this book are 
invited by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, to 
correspond with its Secretary at the following address:
Sankirtan Seva Trust
Hare Krishna Hill, 
Chord Road,  Rajajinagar, 
Bangalore-560 010. INDIA
Ph : 2347 1956
Website: www.iskconbangalore.org
First to Eleventh Printing 	
: 1997 - 2019, 63,000 copies
Twelfth Printing	
		
: October 2022 - 3,000 copies	
	
© 1997, Sankirtan Seva Trust, Bangalore, All Rights Reserved.
ISBN : 81-283-0018-0
Published in India by the Sankirtan Seva Trust.
Printed by Canara Prints, Seegehalli, Bangalore.a


===== PAGE 3 / 131 =====

iii
ISKCON Bangalore daily programme	
vi
Introduction	
1
	 Srila Prabhupada	
1
	 Who is Lord Chaitanya?	
4
Section One : Praëäma Mantras	
6
	 Çréla Prabhupäda Praëati	
6
	 Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Praëati	
6
	 Çréla Gaurakiçora Praëati	
7
	 Çréla Bhaktivinoda Praëati	
7
	 Çréla Jagannätha Praëati	
8
	 Çré Vaiñëava Praëäma	
8	
	 Çré Gauräìga Praëäma	
8
	 Païca-tattva Mahä-mantra	
9
	 Çré Païca-tattva Praëäma	
9
	 Çré Kåñëa Praëäma	
9
	 Çré Rädhä Praëäma	
9
	 Hare Kåñëa Mahä-mantra	
10
Section TWO : Songs of the Vaiñëava Äcäryas	
13
	 Çré Çré Gurv-añöaka	
13
	 Çré Narasiàha Praëäma	
16
	 Prayers to Lord Narasiàha	
17
	 Çré Tulasé Praëäma	
18
CONTENTS


===== PAGE 4 / 131 =====

iv
	 Çré Tulasé Kértana	
18
	 Çré Tulasé Pradakñiëa Mantra	
19
	 Darçana Ärati	
20
	 Sävaraëa-çré-gaura-päda-padme	
20
	 Çré Näma-kértana	
25
	 Çré Guru-vandanä	
26
	 Jaya Rädhä-Mädhava	
27
	 Gaura Ärati	
28
	 Sakhé-vånde Vijïapti	
29
Section THREE : Other Vaiñëava songs	
31
	 Udilo Aruëa	
31
	 Jév jägo	
33
	 Vibhävaré Çeña	
34
	 Gurudeva	
37
	 Ohe! Vaiñëava Öhäkura	
38
	 Näma-saìkértana	
39
	 Bhajahü Re Mana Çré Nanda-nandana	
41
	 Çré Vraja-dhäma-mahimämåta	
42
	 Çré Dämodaräñöaka	
45
	 Çré Rädhikä-stava	
48
	 Sapärñada-bhagavad-viraha-janita-viläpa	
50
Section FOUR : Krishna Consciousness at home	
51
	 An Introduction	
51
	 Chanting the Hare Krishna Mantra	
52
	 Ten Offenses Against Chanting the Holy Name	
55


===== PAGE 5 / 131 =====

v
	 Everyday Life: The Four Regulative Principles	
57
	 Marking the Body with Vishnu-tilaka	
57
	 Setting Up Your Altar	
60
	 Prasadam: How to Prepare and Offer Food	
61
	 Honouring Prasäda	
64
	 Prasäda-seväya	
64
	 Ekadashi	
65
Section Five : Srila Prabhupada Ashraya Program	
67
	 Levels of Ashraya Program	
69
SEction SIX : Prayers	
74
	 Çré Brahma-saàhitä	
74	
	 Çrématé Kuntédevé’s Prayers	
79
	 Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé’s Prayers	
87
	 Dhruva Mahäräja’s Prayers	
92
	 Çré Çré Çikñäñöakam	
98
	 Çré Veìkaöeça Suprabhätam	
101
	 Çré Veìkaöeça Stotram	
110
	 Çré Nåsiàha Kavacam	
113
	 Çré Kåñëa Añöottara Çata Nämävali	
120
	 How to read and write Sanskrit using the English alphabet	
125	


===== PAGE 6 / 131 =====

vi
Time	
	
Programme	
Song/mantras on page
4:15 am	
Mangala Ärati (main temple)	
13
4:35 am	
Tulasé Püja (main temple)	
18-19
4:50 am 	
Narasiàha Ärati (Çré Narasiàha temple)	
16-17
5:05 am	
Çré Veìkaöeça Suprabhätam	
102
	
(Çré Çréniväsa Govinda temple)
5:15 am	
Japa (main temple)
7:15 am	
Darçana Ärati (main temple)	
20-25
7:35 am	
Darçana of Çré Narasiàha	
16-17
7:40 am	
Darçana of Çré Çréniväsa Govinda	
111
7:45 am	
Prabhupäda Püja (main temple)	
26
8:15 am	
Çrémad-Bhägavatam Class (lecture hall)
6:45 pm	
Tulasé Püja (main temple)	
18-19	
7:00 pm	
Sandhyä Ärati (main temple)	
28	
	
& Çré Narasiàha Ärati	
8:00 pm	
Çayana Ärati & Pallaki Utsava	
29
Special programme on Sunday (in the main temple):
5:15 pm	
Bhajans
5:30 pm	
Tulasé Püja
7:00 pm	
Sandhyä Ärati
8:15 pm	
Çayana Ärati & Pallaki Utsava
9:00 pm	
Darçana closes
Darshana remains closed between 1:00 pm and 4:15 pm everyday.
iskcon Bangalore Daily Programme


===== PAGE 7 / 131 =====

1
Srila Prabhupada
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada ap­peared 
in this world in 1896 in Calcutta, India. After complet­ing his college 
education, he met his spiritual master, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati 
Gosvami, in 1922.
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati, a prominent religious scholar and the 
founder of 64 Gaudiya Mathas (Vedic institutions), liked this educated 
young man and convinced him to dedicate his life to teaching Vedic 
knowledge. Srila Prabhupada became his stu­dent, and 11 years later 
(1933), at Allahabad, he became his for­mally initiated disciple.
At their first meeting, in 1922, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati 
Thakura requested Srila Prabhupada to broadcast Vedic knowl­
edge through the English language. In the years that followed, Srila 
Prabhupada wrote a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita, as­sisted the 
Gaudiya Matha in its work, and in 1944 began to write and publish an 
English biweekly magazine, Back to Godhead. This magazine is now 
being continued by Srila Prabhupada’s disciples across the world and 
is published in many lan­guages.
In recognition of Srila Prabhupada’s erudition and devotion, the 
Gaudiya Vaishnava Society in India honored him in 1947 with the title 
“Bhaktivedanta.” In 1950, at the age of 54, Srila Prabhupada retired 
from married life and lived in very humble circumstances in the 
historical medieval temple of Radha-Damodara at Vrindavana. There 
he engaged for several years in deep study and writing. He accepted 
the renounced order of life (sannyasa) in 1959. At Radha-Damodara, 
Introduction 


===== PAGE 8 / 131 =====

2
Srila Prabhupada began work on his life’s masterpiece: a multi-volume 
English translation of the 18,000-verse Srimad-Bhagavatam (Bhagavata 
Purana), with commentary. At that time he also wrote a short book, 
Easy Journey to Other Planets.
After publishing three volumes of the Bhagavatam, Srila Prabhupada 
went to the United States in 1965, to fulfill the mis­sion of his spiritual 
master. Subsequently, His Divine Grace wrote more than 60 volumes 
of authoritative translations, com­mentaries, and summary studies of 
the philosophical and reli­gious classics of India.
In 1965, when he first arrived by freighter in New York city, Srila 
Prabhupada was practically penniless. It was after almost a year of 
great difficulty that he established the International Society for Krishna 
Consciousness in July of 1966. By the time of his passing away on 
November 14, 1977, he had guided the Society and had seen it grow to 
a worldwide confederation of more than a hundred ashramas, schools, 
temples, institutes, and farm communities.
In 1968, Srila Prabhupada created New Vrindavana, a farm 
community in the hills of West Virginia. In­spired by the success of 
New Vrindavana, his students have since founded several similar 
communities throughout the world.
In 1972, His Divine Grace introduced the Vedic system of primary 
and secondary education in the West by founding the gurukula school 
in Dallas, Texas.
Srila Prabhupada’s most significant contribution, however, 
is his books. Highly respected by the academic community for 
their authoritativeness, depth, and clarity, they are used as stan­
dard textbooks in numerous college courses. His writings have 
been translated into 28 languages. The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, 


===== PAGE 9 / 131 =====

3
established in 1972 exclusively to publish the works of His Divine 
Grace, has thus become the world’s largest publisher of books in the 
field of Indian religion and philosophy.
In just 12 years, in spite of his advanced age, Srila Prabhupada 
circled the globe 14 times, lectured in six conti­nents, and, despite 
such a vigorous schedule, he continued to rise hours before dawn 
every day to translate the Vedic texts into English. His writings 
constitute a veritable library of Vedic philosophy, religion, literature, 
and culture.
Read more at: www.iskconbangalore.org/srila-prabhupada


===== PAGE 10 / 131 =====

4
Who is Lord Chaitanya?
In the latter part of the fifteenth century, India’s most ex­traordinary 
religious, cultural, and political reformer appeared in West Bengal. His 
name was Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, the founder of the modern-day 
Hare Krishna Movement.
Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, an incarnation of Krishna,  intro­duced 
a revolutionary spiritual movement based on India’s an­cient Vedic 
literature. He swept aside the stifling restrictions of the caste system 
and allowed people everywhere to transcend social barriers and achieve 
the highest platform of spiritual en­lightenment through the chanting 
of the Hare Krishna mantra.
India’s Vedic scriptures had long predicted His birth in 1486 in 
Mayapur, India. As He grew to young manhood, Lord Chaitanya began 
to carry out His divine mission of allowing people in every station of 
life access to love of God. Sri Chaitanya taught that this awakening 
could be attained by the chanting of God’s holy names, the Hare 
Krishna mantra: Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare 
Hare  Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
As He traveled throughout India, hundreds of thousands of 
people would join Him in massive chanting par­ties. Sri Chaitanya 
often recited to them a Sanskrit verse that described the essence of His 
teachings:
harer näma harer näma harer nämaiva kevalam 
kalau nästy eva nästy eva nästy eva gatir anyathä
“In this Age of Kali there is no other means, no other means, no 
other means for self-realization than chanting the holy name, chanting 
the holy name, chanting the holy name of Lord Hari.”


===== PAGE 11 / 131 =====

5
After the sankirtana movement had gained popularity, a small group 
of envious men from His hometown decided to harass the Lord and His 
devotees. They decided to lie to the local Muslim magistrate (Kazi), 
saying that the Lord was violating Hindu doctrine. Subsequently the 
Kazi, named Nawab Hussain Shah, sent constables who stopped the 
devotees’ chanting. In response, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu organized a 
100,000-man civil disobedience party that chanted and danced down 
the roads of Navadvipa in violation of the magistrate’s order.
After reaching the Kazi’s home, the Lord explained that the 
chanting of the Hare Krishna mantra was a bonafide Vedic method 
for worshiping God, especially in this age. The Kazi, moved by the 
Lord’s purity, declared it an offense for anyone to interfere with the 
sankirtana movement from that time onward. Today, pilgrims still visit 
the tomb of the Kazi in Navadvipa to pay their respects.
The teachings of Sri Chaitanya form the philosophical basis of 
the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON). In 
1986, ISKCON members and millions of people throughout India 
and the world celebrated the 500th anniversary of the ad­vent of 
Sri Chaitanya.
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu advocated a universal religion for all 
humanity, a scientific process of spiritual awakening that has spread 
across the globe.
Read more at: www.iskconbangalore.org/lord-chaitanya


===== PAGE 12 / 131 =====

6
	 1.	 Praëäma Mantras
Çréla Prabhupäda Praëati
nama oà viñëu-pädäya kåñëa-preñöhäya bhü-tale 
çrémate bhaktivedänta-svämin iti nämine
I offer my respectful obeisances unto His Divine Grace 
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda, who is very dear to Lord Kåñëa 
on this earth, having taken shelter at His lotus feet.
namas te särasvate deve gaura-väëé-pracäriëe 
nirviçeña-çünyavädi-päçcätya-deça-täriëe
Our respectful obeisances are unto you, O spiritual master, servant 
of Sarasvaté Gosvämé. You are kindly preaching the message of Lord 
Caitanyadeva and delivering the Western countries, which are filled 
with impersonalism and voidism.
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Praëati
nama oà viñëu-pädäya kåñëa-preñöhäya bhü-tale 
çrémate bhaktisiddhänta-sarasvatéti namine
	
I offer my respectful obeisances unto His Divine Grace Bhaktisid-
dhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Öhäkura, who is very dear to Lord Kåñëa, 
having taken shelter at His lotus feet.
çré-värñabhänavé-devé-dayitäya kåpäbdhaye 
kåñëa-sambandha-vijïäna-däyine prabhave namaù
	
I offer my respectful obeisances to Çré Värñabhänavé-devé-dayita 
däsa [another name of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté], who is favored 


===== PAGE 13 / 131 =====

7
by Çrématé Rädhäräëé and who is the ocean of transcendental mercy 
and the deliverer of the science of Kåñëa.
mädhuryojjvala-premäòhya-çré-rüpänuga-bhaktida- 
çré-gaura-karuëä-çakti-vigrahäya namo ‘stu te
	
I offer my respectful obeisances unto you, the personified energy 
of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu’s mercy, who delivers devotional service 
enriched with conjugal love of Çré Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa, coming exactly 
in the line of revelation of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé.
namas te gaura-väëé-çré-mürtaye déna-täriëe 
rüpänuga-viruddhäpasiddhänta-dhvänta-häriëe
I offer my respectful obeisances unto you, who are the personified 
teachings of Lord Caitanya. You are the deliverer of the fallen souls. 
You do not tolerate any statement which is against the teachings of 
devotional service enunciated by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé.
Çréla Gaurakiçora Praëati
namo gaura-kiçoräya säkñäd-vairägya-mürtaye 
vipralambha-rasämbhodhe pädämbujäya te namaù
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Çréla Gaurakiçora däsa Bäbäjé 
Mahäräja [the spiritual master of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté], 
who is renunciation personified. He is always merged in a feeling of 
separation and intense love of Kåñëa.
Çréla Bhaktivinoda Praëati
namo bhaktivinodäya sac-cid-änanda-nämine 
gaura-çakti-svarüpäya rüpänuga-varäya te
	
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Çréla Saccidänanda 


===== PAGE 14 / 131 =====

8
Bhaktivinoda, who is the transcendental energy of Çré Caitanya 
Mahäprabhu. He is a strict follower of the Gosvämés, headed by Çréla 
Rüpa Gosvämé.
Çréla Jagannätha Praëati
gaurävirbhäva-bhümes tvaà nirdeñöä saj-jana-priyaù 
vaiñëava-särvabhaumaù ñré-jagannäthäya te namaù
	
I offer my respectful obeisances to Çréla Jagannätha däsa Bäbäjé, 
who is respected by the entire Vaiñëava community and who confirmed 
the discovery of the place where Lord Caitanya appeared.
Çré Vaiñëava Praëäma
väïchä-kalpatarubhyaç ca kåpä-sindhubhya eva ca 
patitänäà pävanebhyo vaiñëavebhyo namo namaù
	
I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiñëava devotees of 
the Lord. They are just like desire trees who can fulfill the desires of 
everyone, and they are full of compassion for the fallen conditioned 
souls.
Çré Gauräìga Praëäma
namo mahä-vadänyäya kåñëa-prema-pradäya te 
kåñëäya kåñëa-caitanya-nämne gaura-tviñe namaù
	
O most munificent incarnation! You are Kåñëa Himself appearing 
as Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. You have assumed the golden 
color of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, and You are widely distributing pure love 
of Kåñëa. We offer our respectful obeisances unto You.


===== PAGE 15 / 131 =====

9
Païca-tattva Mahä-mantra
(jaya) çré-kåñëa-caitanya prabhu-nityänanda 
çré-advaita gadädhara çréväsädi-gaura-bhakta-vånda
	
I offer my obeisances to Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityänanda, Çré 
Advaita, Gadädhara, Çréväsa and all others in the line of devotion.
Çré Païca-tattva Praëäma
païca-tattvätmakaà kåñëaà bhakta-rüpa-svarüpakam 
bhaktävatäraà bhaktäkhyaà namämi bhakta-çaktikam
	
I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, who is non-
different from His features as a devotee, devotional manifestation, 
devotional incarnation, pure devotee and devotional energy.
Çré Kåñëa Praëäma
he kåñëa karuëä-sindho déna-bandho jagat-pate 
gopeça gopikä-känta rädhä-känta namo ‘stu te
	
O my dear Kåñëa, O ocean of mercy, O friend of the distressed and 
the source of creation, O master of the cowherd men and the lover of 
the gopés, especially Rädhäräëé, I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You.
Çré Rädhä Praëäma
tapta-käïcana-gauräìgi rädhe våndävaneçvari 
våñabhänu-sute devi praëamämi hari-priye
	
I offer my respectful obeisances to Çrémäté Rädhäräëé, whose bodily 
complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of Våndävana. 
You are the daughter of King Våñabhänu, and You are very dear to 
Lord Kåñëa.


===== PAGE 16 / 131 =====

10
Hare Kåñëa Mahä-mantra
Hare Kåñëa Hare Kåñëa  
Kåñëa Kåñëa Hare Hare 
Hare Räma Hare Räma 
Räma Räma Hare Hare
	
O Çrémäti Rädhäräëé (the divine energy of  Lord Kåñëa), O all-
attractive reservoir of pleasure, Lord Çré Kåñëa, please engage me in 
Your loving devotional service.
PURPORT
by His Divine Grace  
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
The transcendental vibration established by the chanting of Hare 
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, 
Räma Räma, Hare Hare is the sublime method of reviving our Kåñëa 
consciousness. As living spiritual souls we are all originally Kåñëa 
conscious entities, but due to our association with matter from time 
immemorial, our consciousness is now polluted by the material 
atmosphere. The material atmosphere, in which we are now living, is 
called mäyä, or illusion. Mäyä means “that which is not.” And what is 
this illusion? The illusion is that we are all trying to be lords of material 
nature, while actually we are under the grip of her stringent laws. 
When a servant artificially tries to imitate the all-powerful master, this 
is called illusion. In this polluted concept of life, we are all trying to 
exploit the resources of material nature, but actually we are becoming 


===== PAGE 17 / 131 =====

11
more and more entangled in her complexities. Therefore, although we 
are engaged in a hard struggle to conquer nature, we are ever more 
dependent on her. This illusory struggle against material nature can 
be stopped at once by revival of our Kåñëa consciousness.
Kåñëa consciousness is not an artificial imposition on the mind; 
this consciousness is the original energy of the living entity. When 
we hear the transcendental vibration, this consciousness is revived. 
And this process is recommended for this age by authorities. By 
practical experience also, one can perceive that by chanting this mahä-
mantra, or the Great Chanting for Deliverance, one can at once feel 
a transcendental ecstasy coming through from the spiritual stratum. 
And when one is factually on the plane of spiritual understanding 
- surpassing the stages of senses, mind, and intelligence - one is 
situated on the transcendental plane. This chanting of Hare Kåñëa, 
Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma 
Räma, Hare Hare is directly enacted from the spiritual platform, and 
thus this sound vibration surpasses all lower strata of consciousness – 
namely sensual, mental, and intellectual. There is no need, therefore, 
to understand the language of the mantra, nor is there any need for 
mental speculation or any intellectual adjustment for chanting this 
mahä-mantra. It springs automatically from the spiritual platform, and 
as such, anyone can take part in the chanting without any previous 
qualification, and dance in ecstasy.
We have seen this practically. Even a child can take part in the 
chanting, or even a dog can take part in it. Of course, for one who is 
too entangled in material life, it takes a little more time to come to the 
standard point, but even such a materially engrossed man is raised to 
the spiritual platform very quickly. When the mantra is chanted by 
a pure devotee of the Lord in love, it has the greatest efficacy on the 


===== PAGE 18 / 131 =====

12
hearers, and as such, this chanting should be heard from the lips of a 
pure devotee of the Lord, so that immediate effects can be achieved. 
As far as possible, chanting from the lips of nondevotees should be 
avoided. Milk touched by the lips of a serpent has poisonous effects.
The word Harä is the form of addressing the energy of the Lord, 
and the words Kåñëa and Räma are forms of addressing the Lord 
Himself. Both Kåñëa and Räma mean “the supreme pleasure,” and 
Harä is the supreme pleasure energy of the Lord, changed to Hare 
in the vocative. The supreme pleasure energy of the Lord helps us to 
reach the Lord.
The material energy, called mäyä, is also one of the multi-energies 
of the Lord. And we, the living entities, are also the energy - marginal 
energy - of the Lord. The living entities are described as superior to 
material energy. When the superior energy is in contact with the 
inferior energy, an incompatible situation arises; but when the superior 
marginal energy is in contact with the superior energy, called Harä, 
the living entity is established in his happy, normal condition.
These three words, namely Hare, Kåñëa, and Räma, are the 
transcendental seeds of the mahä-mantra. The chanting is a spiritual 
call for the Lord and His internal energy, Harä, to give protection to 
the conditioned soul. This chanting is exactly like the genuine cry of a 
child for its mother. Mother Harä helps the devotee achieve the grace 
of the supreme father, Hari, or Kåñëa, and the Lord reveals Himself 
to the devotee who chants this mantra sincerely.
No other means of spiritual realization, therefore, is as effective in 
this age as chanting the mahä-mantra: Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa 
Kåñëa, Hare Hare/ Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare.


===== PAGE 19 / 131 =====

13
	 2.	 Arati Songs
Songs in this section are  
sung daily in ISKCON temples 
 around the world.
Çré Çré Gurv-añöaka
(Eight Prayers to the Guru)
by Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura
	
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, who appeared in the middle 
of the seventeenth century, is a great spiritual master in the Kåñëa 
conscious chain of gurus and disciples. He says, “One who, with great 
care and attention, loudly recites this beautiful prayer to the spiritual 
master during the brähma-muhürta obtains direct service to Kåñëa, the 
Lord of Våndävana, at the time of his death.”
saàsära-dävänala-léòha-loka- 
träëäya käruëya-ghanäghanatvam 
präptasya kalyäëa-guëärëavasya 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (1)
	
The spiritual master is receiving benediction from the ocean of 
mercy. Just as a cloud pours water on a forest fire to extinguish it, so 
the spiritual master delivers the materially afflicted world by extin-
guishing the blazing fire of material existence. I offer my respectful 
obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master, who is an 
ocean of auspicious qualities.


===== PAGE 20 / 131 =====

14
mahäprabhoù kértana-nåtya-géta- 
väditra-mädyan-manaso rasena 
romäïca-kampäçru-taraìga-bhäjo 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (2)
	
Chanting the holy name, dancing in ecstasy, singing, and playing 
musical instruments, the spiritual master is always gladdened by the 
saìkértana movement of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Because he is 
relishing the mellows of pure devotion within his mind, sometimes 
his bodily hairs stand on end, he feels quivering in his body, and tears 
flow from his eyes like waves. I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
çré-vigrahärädhana-nitya-nänä- 
çåìgära-tan-mandira-märjanädau 
yuktasya bhaktäàç ca niyuïjato ‘pi 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (3)
	
The spiritual master is always engaged in the temple worship of Çré 
Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa. He also engages his disciples in such worship. 
They dress the Deities in beautiful clothes and ornaments, clean Their 
temple, and perform other similar worship of the Lord. I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
catur-vidha-çré-bhagavat-prasäda- 
svädv-anna-tåptän hari-bhakta-saìghän 
kåtvaiva tåptià bhajataù sadaiva 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (4)
	
The spiritual master is always offering Kåñëa four kinds of delicious 
food [analyzed as that which is licked, chewed, drunk, and sucked]. 
When the spiritual master sees that the devotees are satisfied by eating 


===== PAGE 21 / 131 =====

15
bhagavat-prasäda, he is satisfied. I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
çré-rädhikä-mädhavayor apära- 
mädhurya-lélä guëa-rüpa-nämnäm 
prati-kñaëäsvädana-lolupasya 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (5)
	
The spiritual master is always eager to hear and chant about the 
unlimited conjugal pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhikä and Mädhava, and 
about Their qualities, names, and forms. The spiritual master aspires 
to relish these at every moment. I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
nikuïja-yüno rati-keli-siddhyai 
yä yälibhir yuktir apekñaëéyä 
taträti-däkñyäd ati-vallabhasya 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (6)
	
The spiritual master is very dear, because he is expert in assisting 
the gopés, who at different times make different tasteful arrangements 
for the perfection of Rädhä and Kåñëa’s conjugal loving affairs within 
the groves of Våndävana. I offer my most humble obeisances unto the 
lotus feet of such a spiritual master.
säkñäd-dharitvena samasta-çästrair 
uktas tathä bhävyata eva sadbhiù 
kintu prabhor yaù priya eva tasya 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (7)
	
The spiritual master is to be honored as much as the Supreme 
Lord because he is the most confidential servitor of the Lord. This is 
acknowledged in all revealed scriptures and followed by all authorities. 


===== PAGE 22 / 131 =====

16
Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of 
such a spiritual master, who is a bona fide representative of Çré Hari 
[Kåñëa].
yasya prasädäd bhagavat-prasädo 
yasyäprasädän na gatiù kuto ‘pi 
dhyäyan stuvaàs tasya yaças tri-sandhyaà 
vande guroù çré-caraëäravindam (8)
	
By the mercy of the spiritual master one receives the benediction 
of Kåñëa. Without the grace of the spiritual master, one cannot make 
any advancement. Therefore, I should always remember and praise the 
spiritual master. At least three times a day I should offer my respectful 
obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master.
Çré Narasiàha Praëäma
namas te narasiàhäya prahlädähläda-däyine 
hiraëyakaçipor vakñaù-çilä-öaìka-nakhälaye
	
I offer my obeisances to Lord Narasiàha who gives joy to 
Prahläda Mahäräja and whose nails are like chisels on the stonelike 
chest of the demon Hiraëyakaçipu.
ito nåsiàhaù parato nåsiàhah 
 yato yato yämi tato nåsiàhaù 
bahir nåsiàhah hådaye nåsiàhah 
 nåsiàham ädià çaraëaà prapadye
	
Lord Nåsiàha is here and also there. Wherever I go Lord Nåsiàha 
is there. He is in the heart and is outside as well. I surrender to Lord 
Nåsiàha, the origin of all things and the supreme refuge.


===== PAGE 23 / 131 =====

17
Prayers to Lord Narasiàha
1. Sung by Lord Caitanya before Lord Narasiàha at Siàhäcala 
(Çré Caitanya-caritämåta, Madhya-lélä, 8.5)
çré-nåsiàha, jaya nåsiàha, jaya jaya nåsiàha 
prahlädeça jaya padmä-mukha-padma-bhåìga
	
All glories to Nåsiàhadeva! All glories to Nåsiàhadeva, who is the 
Lord of Prahläda Mahäräja and, like a honeybee, is always engaged in 
beholding the lotuslike face of the goddess of fortune.
2. From Çré Daçävatära-stotra by Çréla Jayadeva Gosvämé
tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-çåìgaà 
dalita-hiraëyakaçipu-tanu-bhåìgam 
keçava dhåta-narahari-rüpa jaya jagadéça hare
	
O Keçava! O Lord of the universe! O Lord Hari, who have assumed 
the form of a half-man, half-lion! All glories to You! With the wonder-
fully sharp nails on Your beautiful lotus hands You have ripped apart 
the wasplike body of Hiraëyakaçipu.


===== PAGE 24 / 131 =====

18
Çré Tulasé Praëäma
	
In the morning, after maìgala-äraté (and preferably also in the 
evening, before sandhyä-äraté), all the assembled devotees should 
attend tulasé worship and circumambulate Çrématé Tulasé-devé. First 
we offer obeisances to Tulasé-devé with the tulasé-praëäma-mantra, 
chanted three times:
(oà) våndäyai tulasé-devyai priyäyai keçavasya ca 
viñëu-bhakti-prade devi satyavatyai namo namaù
	
I offer my repeated obeisances unto Våndä, Çrématé Tulasé-devé, 
who is very dear to Lord Keçava. O goddess, you bestow devotional 
service to Kåñëa and you possess the highest truth.
Çré Tulasé Kértana
namo namaù tulasé kåñëa-preyasi namo namaù 
rädhä-kåñëa-sevä päbo ei abhiläñé (1)
	
O Tulasé, beloved of Kåñëa, I bow before you again and again. My 
desire is to obtain the service of Çré Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa.
ye tomära çaraëa loy, tara väïchä pürëa hoy 
kåpä kori’ koro täre våndävana-väsi (2)
	
Whoever takes shelter of you has his wishes fulfilled. Bestowing 
your mercy on him, you make him a resident of Våndävana.
mora ei abhiläña, viläsa kuïje dio väsa 
nayane heribo sadä yugala-rüpa-räçi (3)
	
My desire is that you will also give me a residence in the plea-
sure groves of Çré Våndävana-dhäma. Thus within my vision I will 
always behold the beautiful pastimes of Rädhä and Kåñëa.


===== PAGE 25 / 131 =====

19
ei nivedana dharo, sakhér anugata koro 
sevä-adhikära diye koro néja däsé (4)
	
I beg you to make me a follower of the cowherd damsels of Vraja. 
Please give me the privilege of devotional service and make me your 
own maidservant.
déna kåñëa-däse koy, ei jena mora hoy 
çré-rädhä-govinda-preme sadä yena bhäsi (5)
	
This very fallen and lowly servant of Kåñëa prays, “May I always 
swim in the love of Çré Çré Rädhä and Govinda.”
Çré Tulasé Pradakñiëa Mantra
	
When the song is finished, the assembled Vaiñëavas should cir-
cumambulate Tulasé-devé at least four times and offer her water by 
pouring some drops at her root (only during morning worship, not 
in the evening). While circumambulating, we chant,
yäni käni ca päpäni brahma-hatyädikäni ca 
täni täni praëaçyanti pradakñiëaù pade pade
	
When a person circumambulates Çrématé Tulasé-devé, all the sins 
he may have committed are destroyed at every step, even the sin of 
killing a brähmaëa.


===== PAGE 26 / 131 =====

20
Darçana Ärati
(from Çré Brahma-saàhitä)
veëuà kvaëantam aravinda-daläyatäkñaà 
barhävataàsam asitämbuda-sundaräìgam 
kandarpa-koöi-kaminéya-viçeña-çobhaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
	
I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing on 
His flute, with blooming eyes like lotus petals with head decked with 
peacock’s feather, with the figure of beauty tinged with the hue of 
blue clouds, and His unique loveliness charming millions of Cupids. 
[Brahma-saàhitä Text 5.30]
aìgäni yasya sakalendriya-våtti-manti 
paçyanti pänti kalayanti ciraà jaganti 
änanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
	
I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose transcendental form 
is full of bliss, truth, substantiality and is thus full of the most dazzling 
splendor. Each of the limbs of that transcendental figure possesses 
in Himself, the full-fledged functions of all the organs, and eternally 
sees, maintains and manifests the infinite universes, both spiritual and 
mundane. [Brahma-saàhitä Text 5.32]
Sävaraëa-çré-gaura-päda-padme
(A Prayer to the Lotus Feet of Çré Gauräìga)
from Prärthanä by Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura
çré-kåñëa-caitanya prabhu doyä koro more 
tomä binä ke doyälu jagat-saàsäre (1)


===== PAGE 27 / 131 =====

21
	
My dear Lord Caitanya, please be merciful to me, because who can 
be more merciful than Your Lordship within these three worlds?
patita-pävana-hetu tava avatära 
mo sama patita prabhu nä päibe ära (2)
	
Your incarnation is just to reclaim the conditioned, fallen souls, 
but I assure You that You will not find a greater fallen soul than me. 
Therefore, my claim is first.
hä hä prabhu nityänanda, premänanda sukhé 
kåpävalokana koro ämi boro duùkhé (3)
	
My dear Lord Nityänanda, You are always joyful in spiritual bliss. 
Since You always appear very happy, I have come to You because I 
am most unhappy. If You kindly put Your glance over me, then I may 
also become happy.
doyä koro sétä-pati adwaita gosäi 
tava kåpä-bale päi caitanya-nitäi (4)
	
My dear Advaita Prabhu, husband of Sétä, You are so kind. Please 
be merciful to me. If You are kind to me, naturally Lord Caitanya and 
Nityänanda will also be kind to me.
hä hä swarüp, sanätana, rüpa, raghunätha 
bhaööa-juga, çré-jéva hä prabhu lokanätha (5)
	
O Svarüpa Dämodara, personal secretary of Lord Caitanya, O six 
Gosvämés; Çré Rupa Gosvämé, Çré Sanätana Gosvämé, Çré Raghunätha 
Bhaööa Gosvämé, Çré Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé, Sré Jéva Gosvämé, and 
Çré Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé! O Lokanätha Gosvämé, my beloved 
spiritual master! Narottama däsa also prays for your mercy.
doyä koro çré-äcärya prabhu çréniväsa 
rämacandra-saìga mäge narottama-däsa (6)


===== PAGE 28 / 131 =====

22
	
O Çréniväsa Äcärya, successor to the six Gosvämés! Please be merci-
ful to me. Narottama däsa always desires the company of Rämacandra 
Cakravarté.
Purport
by His Divine Grace 
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupäda
	
This is a song composed by Narottama däsa Öhäkura. He prays to 
Lord Caitanya, “My dear Lord, please be merciful to me, because who 
can be more merciful than Your Lordship within these three worlds?” 
Actually, this is a fact. Not only Narottama däsa Öhäkura, but Rüpa 
Gosvämé also prayed to Lord Caitanya in this way. At the time of the 
first meeting of Lord Caitanya and Rüpa Gosvämé at Prayäga (Al-
lahabad), Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé said, “My dear Lord, You are the most 
munificent of all incarnations, because You are distributing love of 
Kåñëa, Kåñëa consciousness. “ When Kåñëa was personally present 
He simply asked us to surrender, but He did not distribute Himself 
so easily. He made conditions - “First of all you surrender.” But this 
incarnation, Lord Caitanya, although Kåñëa Himself, makes no such 
condition. He simply distributes: “Take love of Kåñëa.” Therefore Lord 
Caitanya is approved as the most munificent incarnation. Narottama 
däsa Öhäkura says, “Please be merciful to me. You are so magnanimous, 
because You have seen the fallen souls of this age, and You are very 
much compassionate to them, but You should know also that I am the 
most fallen. No one is more greatly fallen than me.” Patita-pävana-hetu 
tava avatära: “Your incarnation is just to reclaim the conditioned, fallen 
souls, but I assure You that You will not find a greater fallen soul than 
me. Therefore, my claim is first.”


===== PAGE 29 / 131 =====

23
	
Then he prays to Lord Nityänanda. He says, hä hä prabhu nityän-
anda premänanda-sukhé: “My dear Lord Nityänanda, You are always 
joyful in spiritual bliss. Since You always appear very happy, I have 
come to You because I am most unhappy. If You kindly put Your 
glance over me, I may also become happy.” Then he prays to Advaita 
Prabhu. Doyä koro sétä-pati adwaita gosäi. Advaita Prabhu’s wife’s 
name was Sétä. Therefore He is sometimes addressed as sétä-pati. Thus 
Narottama däsa Öhäkura prays, “My dear Advaita Prabhu, husband 
of Sétä, You are so kind. Please be kind to me. If You are kind to me, 
naturally Lord Caitanya and Nityänanda will also be kind to me.” 
Actually, Advaita Prabhu invited Lord Caitanya to come down. When 
Advaita Prabhu saw that the fallen souls were all engaged simply in 
sense gratificatory processes, not understanding Kåñëa consciousness, 
He felt very much compassionate toward the fallen souls, and He also 
felt Himself incapable of claiming them all. He therefore prayed to 
Lord Kåñëa, “Please come Yourself. Without Your personal presence 
it is not possible to deliver these fallen souls.” Thus by His invitation 
Lord Caitanya appeared. Naturally, Narottama däsa Öhäkura prays to 
Advaita Prabhu, “If You will be kind to me, naturally Lord Caitanya 
and Nityänanda also will be kind to me.”
	
Then he prays to the Gosvämés. Hä hä swarüp, sanätana, rüpa, ra-
ghunätha. Swarüp refers to Svarüpa Dämodara, the personal secretary 
of Lord Caitanya. He was always with Caitanya Mahäprabhu and im-
mediately arranged for whatever Caitanya Mahäprabhu wanted. Two 
personal attendants, Svarüpa Dämodara and Govinda, were always 
constantly with Lord Caitanya. Therefore, Narottama däsa Öhäkura 
also prays to Svarüpa Dämodara and then to the six Gosvämés, the next 
disciples of Lord Caitanya - Çré Rüpa Gosvämé, Çré Sanätana Gosvämé, 


===== PAGE 30 / 131 =====

24
Çré Bhaööa Raghunätha Gosvämé, Çré Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé, Çré Jéva 
Gosvämé, and Çré Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé. These six Gosvämés were 
directly instructed by Lord Caitanya to spread this movement of Kåñëa 
consciousness. Narottama däsa Thäkura also prays for their mercy.
	
After the six Gosvämés, the next äcärya was Çréniväsa Äcärya. Ac-
tually, Narottama däsa Öhäkura was in the disciplic succession after 
Çréniväsa Äcärya and was almost his contemporary, and Narottama 
däsa’s personal friend was Rämacandra Cakravarté. Therefore he prays, 
“I always desire the company of Rämacandra.” He desires a devotee’s 
company. The whole process is that we should always pray for the 
mercy of the superior äcäryas and keep company with pure devotees. 
Then it will be easier for us to advance in Kåñëa consciousness and 
receive the mercy of Lord Caitanya and Lord Kåñëa. This is the sum 
and substance of this song sung by Narottama däsa Öhäkura.


===== PAGE 31 / 131 =====

25
Çré Näma-kértana
(Chanting of the Holy Names) 
from Gétävalé by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura
yaçomaté-nandana, braja-baro-nägara, 
gokula-raïjana käna 
gopé-paräëa-dhana, madana-manohara, 
käliya-damana-vidhäna (1)
	
Lord Kåñëa is the beloved son of mother Yaçodä; the transcendental 
lover in the land of Vraja; the delight of Gokula; Käna [a nickname of 
Kåñëa]; the wealth of the lives of the gopés. He steals the mind of even 
Cupid and punishes the Käliya serpent.
amala harinäm amiya-viläsä 
vipina-purandara, navéna nägara-bora, 
baàçé-badana suväsä (2)
	
These pure, holy names of Lord Hari are full of sweet, nectarean 
pastimes. Kåñëa is the Lord of the twelve forests of Vraja, He is ever-
youthful and is the best of lovers. He is always playing on a flute, and 
He is an excellent dresser.
braja-jana-pälana, asura-kula-näçana 
nanda-godhana-räkhowälä 
govinda mädhava, navanéta-taskara, 
sundara nanda-gopälä (3)
	
Kåñëa is the protector of the inhabitants of Vraja; the destroyer of 
various demoniac dynasties; the keeper and tender of Nanda Mahäräja’s 
cows; the giver of pleasure to the cows, land, and spiritual senses; the 
husband of the goddess of fortune; the butter thief; and the beautiful 
cowherd boy of Nanda Mahäräja.


===== PAGE 32 / 131 =====

26
yämuna-taöa-cara, gopé-basana-hara, 
räsa-rasika, kåpämoya 
çré-rädhä-vallabha, båndäbana-naöabara, 
bhakativinod-äçraya (4)
	
Kåñëa wanders along the banks of the river Yamunä. He stole the 
garments of the young damsels of Vraja who were bathing there. He 
delights in the mellows of the räsa dance; He is very merciful; the lover 
and beloved of Çrématé Rädhäräëé; the great dancer of Våndävana; and 
the shelter and only refuge of Öhäkura Bhaktivinoda.
Çré Guru-vandanä
(The Worship of Çré Guru) 
from Prema-bhakti-candrikä by Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura 
çré-guru-caraëa-padma, kevala-bhakati-sadma, 
bando mui sävadhäna mate 
jähära prasäde bhäi, e bhava toriyä jäi, 
kåñëa-präpti hoy jähä ha’te (1)
	
The lotus feet of our spiritual master are the abode of pure devo-
tional service. I bow down to his lotus feet with great care and atten-
tion. My dear brothers! It is through the grace of our spiritual master 
that we can cross over this material existence and attain Kåñëa.
guru-mukha-padma-väkya, cittete koriyä aikya, 
är nä koriho mane äçä 
çré-guru-caraëe rati, ei se uttama-gati, 
je prasäde püre sarva äçä (2)
	
Make the teachings emanating from the lotus mouth of our spiritual 
master one with your heart, and do not desire anything else. Attach-
ment to his lotus feet is the best way to make spiritual advancement. 
His mercy fulfills all desires for spiritual perfection.


===== PAGE 33 / 131 =====

27
cakhu-dän dilo jei, janme janme prabhu sei, 
divya jïän håde prokäçito 
prema-bhakti jähä hoite, avidyä vinäça jäte, 
vede gäy jähära carito (3)
	
He who has given us the gift of transcendental vision is our lord, 
birth after birth. It is by his mercy that divine knowledge is revealed 
within our hearts, bestowing pure love for Kåñëa and destroying ig-
norance. The Vedic scriptures sing of his character.
çré-guru karuëä-sindhu, adhama janära bandhu, 
lokanäth lokera jévana 
hä hä prabhu koro doyä, deho more pada-chäyä, 
ebe jaça ghuñuk tribhuvana (4)
	
O spiritual master, O ocean of mercy and friend of the fallen! O 
universal teacher and life of all people! Be merciful unto us, O mas-
ter, and give us the shade of your lotus feet. May your glories now be 
proclaimed throughout the three worlds.
Jaya Rädhä-Mädhava
(from Gétävalé by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura)
 (jaya) rädhä-mädhava (jaya) kuïja-bihäré 
(jaya) gopé-jana-vallabha (jaya) giri-vara-dhäré 
(jaya) jaçodä-nandana, (jaya) braja-jana-raïjana, 
(jaya) jämuna-téra-vana-cäré
	
Kåñëa is the lover of Rädhä. He displays many amorous pastimes 
in the groves of Våndävana, He is the lover of the cowherd maidens of 
Vraja, the holder of the great hill named Govardhana, and the beloved 
son of mother Yaçodä. He delights the inhabitants of Vraja and wanders 
in the forests along the banks of the river Yamunä.


===== PAGE 34 / 131 =====

28
Gaura Ärati
(from Gétävalé by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura)
jaya jaya goräcänder äratiko çobhä 
jähnavé-taöa-vane jaga-mana-lobhä (1)
	
All glories, all glories to the beautiful ärati ceremony of Lord 
Caitanya! This Gaura-ärati is being performed in a grove on the bank 
of the Ganges and is captivating everyone in the universe.
dakhiëe nitäicänd, bäme gadädhara 
nikaöe adwaita, çréniväsa chatra-dhara (2)
	
On Lord Caitanya’s right is Lord Nityänanda, and on His left is 
Çré Gadädhara. Nearby stands Çré Advaita, and Çréväsa Öhäkura holds 
an umbrella over Lord Caitanya’s head.
bosiyäche goräcänd ratna-siàhäsane 
ärati koren brahmä-ädi deva-gaëe (3)
Lord Caitanya has sat down on a jeweled throne, and Lord Brahmä 
and the other demigods are performing His ärati.
narahari-ädi kori’ cämara òhuläya 
saïjaya-mukunda-bäsu-ghoñ-ädi gäya (4)
	
As Narahari Sarakära and other associates of Lord Caitanya fan 
Him with cämaras, Saïjaya Paëòita, Mukunda Datta, Väsu Ghoña and 
other devotees sing sweet kértana.
çaìkha bäje ghaëöä bäje bäje karatäla 
madhura mådaìga bäje parama rasäla (5)
	
Conchshells, bells, and karatälas resound, and the mådaìgas play 
very sweetly. This kértana music is supremely sweet and relishable to 
hear.


===== PAGE 35 / 131 =====

29
bahu-koöi candra jini’ vadana ujjvala 
gala-deçe bana-mälä kore jhalamala (6)
	
The brilliance of Lord Caitanya’s face conquers millions upon 
millions of moons, and the garland of forest flowers around His neck 
shines.
çiva-çuka-närada preme gada-gada 
bhakativinoda dekhe gorära sampada (7)
	
Lord Çiva, Çukadeva Gosvämé, and Närada Muni are all present, 
and their voices are choked with the great ecstasy of transcendental 
love. Thus Öhäkura Bhaktivinoda envisions the glory of Lord Çré 
Caitanya.
Sakhé-vånde Vijïapti
(Prayer to the Sakhés)
from Prärthanä by Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura
rädhä-kåñëa präëa mora jugala-kiçora 
jévane maraëe gati äro nähi mora (1)
The divine couple, Çré Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa, are my life and soul. 
In life or death I have no other refuge but Them.
kälindéra küle keli-kadambera vana 
ratana-bedéra upara bosäbo du’jana (2)
In a forest of small kadamba trees on the bank of the Yamunä, I will 
seat the divine couple on a throne made of brilliant jewels.
çyäma-gauré-aìge dibo (cüwä) candanera gandha 
cämara òhuläbo kabe heri mukha-candra (3)


===== PAGE 36 / 131 =====

30
I will anoint Their dark and fair forms with sandalwood paste 
scented with cüyä, and I will fan Them with a cämara whisk. Oh, 
when will I behold Their moonlike faces?
gäthiyä mälatér mälä dibo dohära gale 
adhare tuliyä dibo karpüra-tämbüle (4)
After stringing together garlands of mälaté flowers I will place them 
around Their necks, and I will offer tämbüla scented with camphor 
to Their lotus mouths.
lalitä viçäkhä-ädi jata sakhé-bånda 
äjïäya koribo sebä caraëäravinda (5)
With the permission of all the sakhés, headed by Lalitä and Viçäkhä, 
I will serve the lotus feet of Rädhä and Kåñëa.
çré-kåñëa-caitanya-prabhur däser anudäsa 
sevä abhiläña kore narottama-däsa (6)
Narottama däsa, the servant of the servant of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya 
Prabhu, longs for this service to the divine couple.


===== PAGE 37 / 131 =====

31
	 3.	 Other Vaiñëava Songs
Aruëodaya Kértana
(Kértana songs to be sung at dawn)
from Gétävalé by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura
1. Udilo Aruëa
 udilo aruëa püraba-bhäge, 
dwija-maëi gorä amani jäge, 
bhakata-samüha loiyä säthe, 
gelä nagara-bräje (1)
When the eastern horizon became tinged with the redness 
that heralds the rising of the sun, the jewel among the twice-born 
brähmaëas, Lord Gaurasundara, immediately awakened. Taking 
all His devotees with Him, He journeyed through the towns and 
villages of Nadéyä.
‘täthai täthai’ bäjalo khol, 
ghana ghana tähe jhäìjera rol, 
preme òhala òhala soëära aìga, 
caraëe nüpura bäje (2)
The mådaìgas resounded “täthai, täthai” in quick succession while 
the large jhäìjha cymbals chimed in time. Lord Gauräìga’s golden 
form trembles again and again in ecstatic love of Godhead, and His 
footbells jingle.
mukunda mädhava yädava hari, 
bolena bolo re vadana bhori’, 
miche nida-baçe gelo re räti, 
divasa çaréra-säje (3)


===== PAGE 38 / 131 =====

32
Lord Caitanya calls out to the townsfolk, “Fill your mouths 
with the holy names `Mukunda! Mädhava! Yädava! and Hari!’ You 
spend your nights uselessly sleeping and your days decorating your 
bodies!”
emana durlabha mänava-deho, 
päiyä ki koro bhäva nä keho, 
ebe nä bhajile yaçodä-suta, 
carame poòibe läje (4)
	
“You have achieved this rare human body. Don’t you care for this 
gift? If you do not worship the darling of Mother Yaçodä now, then 
great sorrow awaits you at the time of your death.’’
udita tapana hoile asta, 
dina gelo boli’ hoibe byasta, 
tabe keno ebe alasa hoy, 
nä bhaja hådoya-räje (5)
“With every rising and setting of the sun, a day passes and is lost. 
Why then do you remain idle and not serve the Lord of the heart?’’
jévana anitya jänaha sär, 
tähe nänä-vidha vipada-bhär, 
nämäçraya kori’ jatane tumi, 
thäkaha äpana käje (6)
“You should understand this essential fact: Life is temporary and 
filled with various kinds of misery. Therefore, carefully take shelter 
of the holy name and remain always engaged in His service as your 
eternal occupation.’’
jévera kalyäna-sädhana-käm, 
jagate äsi’ e madhura näm, 
avidyä-timira-tapana-rüpe, 
håd-gagaëe viräje (7)


===== PAGE 39 / 131 =====

33
	
“Desiring to shower benedictions upon all living entities, this 
sweet name of Kåñëa has descended to this material universe and 
shines like the sun in the sky of the heart, destroying the darkness of 
ignorance.”
kåñëa-näma-sudhä koriyä pän, 
juräo bhakativinoda-prän, 
näma vinä kichu nähiko äro, 
caudda-bhuvana-mäjhe (8)
	
Drink the pure nectar of the holy name of Kåñëa and thus satisfy 
the soul of Bhaktivinoda. Except for the holy name there is nothing 
within all the fourteen worlds.
2.  Jév jägo
jév jägo, jév jägo, gauracända bole 
kota nidrä jäo mäyä-péçäcéra kole (1)
“Wake up, sleeping souls! Wake up, sleeping souls!” Lord Gauräìga 
calls, “You have slept so long in the lap of the witch Mäyä!”
bhajibo boliyä ese soàsära-bhitare 
bhuliyä rohile tumi avidyära bhare (2)
	
“You came into this world saying, `O my Lord I will certainly 
worship You,’ but having forgotten this promise you remain in great 
ignorance.’’
tomäre loite ämi hoinu avatära 
ämi vinä bandhu ära ke äche tomära (3)
	
“I have descended to this world just to reclaim you. Other than 
Myself, who else is your true friend?’’
enechi auñadhi mäyä näçibäro lägi’ 
hari-näma mahä-mantra lao tumi mägi’ (4)


===== PAGE 40 / 131 =====

34
“I have brought the medicine for destroying the illusion of Mäyä. 
Now beg for this hari-näma-mahä-mantra and take it.”
bhakativinoda prabhu-caraëe pariyä 
sei hari-näma-mantra loilo mägiyä (5)
Bhaktivinoda fell at the lotus feet of Lord Gauräìga, and after 
begging for the holy name he indeed received that mahä-mantra.
Vibhävaré  Çeña
(from Kalyäëa-kalpataru by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura)
vibhävaré çeña, äloka-praveça, 
nidrä chäri’ uöho jéva 
bolo hari hari, mukunda muräri, 
räma kåñëa hayagréva (1)
	
The night has come to an end and the light of dawn is entering. O 
jéva soul, arise and give up your sleep. Chant the holy names of Lord 
Hari, who is the giver of liberation; the enemy of the Mura demon; 
the supreme enjoyer; the all-attractive one; and the horse-headed 
incarnation, Hayagréva.
nåsiàha vämana, çré-madhusüdana, 
brajendra-nandana çyäma 
pütanä-ghätana, kaiöabha-çätana, 
jaya däçarathi-räma (2)
	
Lord Hari  [Kåñëa] incarnated as the half-man, half-lion, Nåsiàha. 
He appeared as a dwarf-brähmaëa named Upendra and is the killer of 
the Madhu demon. He is the beloved son of the King of Vraja, Nanda 
Mahäräja, and is dark in complexion. He is the slayer of the Pütanä 
witch and the destroyer of the demon Kaiöabha. All glories to Lord 
Hari, who appeared as Lord Räma, the son of King Daçaratha.


===== PAGE 41 / 131 =====

35
yaçodä duläla, govinda-gopäla, 
våndävana purandara 
gopé-priya-jana, rädhikä-ramaëa, 
bhuvana-sundara-bara (3)
	
He is the darling of mother Yaçodä; the giver of pleasure to the 
cows, land, and spiritual senses; and the protector of the cows. He 
is the Lord of the Våndävana forest; the gopés’ beloved; the lover of 
Rädhikä; and the most beautiful personality in all the worlds.
räväëäntakara, mäkhana-taskara, 
gopé-jana-vastra-häré 
brajera räkhäla, gopa-vånda-päla, 
citta-häré baàçé-dhäré (4)
	
As Rämacandra He brought about the end of the demoniac King 
Rävaëa; as Kåñëa He stole the older gopés’ butter; He stole the younger 
gopés’ clothes while they were bathing in the Yamunä. He is a cowherd 
boy of Vraja and the protector of the cowherd boys. He steals the hearts 
of all and always holds a flute.
yogéndra-bandana, çré-nanda-nandana, 
braja-jana-bhaya-häré 
navéna nérada, rüpa manohara, 
mohana-baàçé-bihäré (5)
	
Lord Kåñëa is worshiped by the best of yogés and is the son of 
Nanda. He removes all the fears of the inhabitants of Vraja. He is the 
color of a fresh rain cloud, and His form is enchanting. When He 
wanders about, playing His flute, He looks very charming.
yaçodä-nandana, kaàsa-nisüdana, 
nikuïja-räsa-viläsé 
kadamba-känana, räsa-paräyaëa, 
bånda-vipina-niväsé (6)


===== PAGE 42 / 131 =====

36
	
He is the son of Yaçodä and the killer of King Kaàsa, and He 
sports in the räsa dance among the groves of Vraja. Kåñëa engages in 
this räsa dance underneath the kadamba trees, and He resides in the 
forest of Våndävana.
änanda-vardhana, prema-niketana, 
phula-çara-jojaka käma 
gopäìganä-gaëa, citta-vinodana, 
samasta-guëa-gaëa-dhäma (7)
	
He increases the ecstasy of His devotees. He is the reservoir of all 
love and is the transcendental Cupid who uses His flowered arrows 
to increase the loving desires of the gopés. He is the pleasure of the 
gopés’ hearts and the abode of all wonderful qualities.
jämuna-jévana, keli-paräyaëa, 
mänasa-candra-cakora 
näma-sudhä-rasa, gäo kåñëa-jaça 
räkho vacana mana mora (8)
	
Lord Kåñëa is the life of the river Yamunä. He is always absorbed 
in amorous pastimes, and He is the moon of the gopés’ minds, which 
are like the cakora birds that subsist only upon moonlight. O mind, 
obey these words of mine and sing the glories of Çré Kåñëa in the form 
of these holy names, which are full of nectarean mellows.


===== PAGE 43 / 131 =====

37
Gurudeva
(from Çaraëägati by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura)
gurudev!
kåpä-bindu diyä,  koro’ ei däse, 
tåëäpekhä ati héna
sakala sahane, bala diyä koro’, 
nija-mäne spåhä-héna (1)
	
O Gurudeva! By administering a drop of your mercy make this 
servant of yours infinitely more humble than a blade of grass. Giving 
me the strength to bear all trials and troubles, free me from desires 
for personal honor.
sakale sammäna,  korite çakati,
deho’ nätha! jathäjatha
tabe to’ gäibo,  hari-näma-sukhe,
aparädha ha’be hata (2)
	
O lord and master! Inspire me with the power to befittingly honor 
all living beings. Only then will I sing the holy name of the Lord in 
great ecstasy, and my offensive activities will cease.
kabe heno kåpä,  labhiyä e jana,
kåtärtha hoibe, nätha!
çakti-buddhi-héna,  ämi ati déna,
koro’ more ätma-sätha (3)
	
When will this person be indeed blessed by receiving your mercy, 
O lord and master? Devoid of all strength and intelligence, I am very 
low and fallen. Please make me your own.


===== PAGE 44 / 131 =====

38
yogyatä-vicäre,  kichu nähi päi,
tomära karuëä—sära
karuëä nä hoile,  käìdiyä käìdiyä,
präëa nä räkhibo ära (4)
	
When I examine myself for worthiness, I find nothing of value. 
Therefore your mercy is the essence of life. If you are not merciful 
to me, then I will constantly weep and weep, no longer being able to 
maintain my life.
Ohe! Vaiñëava Öhäkura
(from Çaraëägati by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura) 
ohe!
vaiñëava öhäkura,  doyära sägara,
e däse korunä kori’
diyä pada-chäyä,  çodho he ämäya,
tomära caraëa dhori (1)
	
O revered Vaiñnava Öhäkura! O ocean of mercy! Please be merciful 
to me, your humble servant. Purify me by giving the shade of your 
lotus feet. Your feet I clasp submissively.
chaya bega domi’,  chaya doña çodhi’,
chaya guna deho’ däse
chaya sat-saìga,  deho’ he ämäre,
boshechi saìgera äçe (2)
	
Please help me to control the six urges, purify me of the six faults, 
and please instill in your servant the six good qualities. Oh, bestow 
upon me the six kinds of holy association! I am seated here in the 
hope of having your company.


===== PAGE 45 / 131 =====

39
ekaké ämära,  nähi päya bala,
hari-näma-saìkértane
tumi kåpä kori’,  çraddhä-bindu diyä,
deho’ kåñëa-näma-dhane (3)
	
On my own, I find I have no strength to chant the holy name of 
Lord Hari. Please be merciful by awarding me with a particle of faith 
and giving me the great treasure of the holy name of Kåñëa.
kåñëa se tomära,  kåñëa dite päro,
tomära çakati äche
ämi to’ käìgäla,  ‘kåñëa’ ‘kåñëa’ boli’,
dhäi tava päche päche (4)
	
Kåñëa is yours, therefore you are able to give Him to others. This is 
certainly within your power. I am indeed wretched and fallen, simply 
running after you crying “Kåñëa! Kåñëa!”
Näma-saìkértana
(by Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura)
hari haraye namaù kåñëa yädaväya namaù
yädaväya mädhaväya keçaväya namaù (1)
	
O Lord Hari, O Lord Kåñëa, I offer my obeisances to You, who are 
known as Hari, Yädava, Mädhava, and Keçava.
gopäla govinda räma çré-madhusüdana
giridhäré gopénätha madana-mohana (2)
	
O Gopäla, Govinda, Räma, Çré Madhusüdana, Giridhäré, Gopénätha, 
and Madana-mohana!
çré-caitanya-nityänanda çré-advaita-sétä
hari guru vaiñëaba bhägavata gétä (3)


===== PAGE 46 / 131 =====

40
	
All glories to Çré Caitanya and Nityänanda! All glories to Çré Advaita 
Äcärya and His consort, Çré Sétä Öhäkuräëé. All glories to Lord Hari, to 
the spiritual master, the Vaiñëavas, Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and Çrémad 
Bhagavad-Gétä.
çré-rüpa sanätana bhaööa-raghunätha
çré-jéva gopäla-bhaööa däsa-raghunätha (4)
	
All glories to Çré Rüpa Gosvämé, Sanätana Gosvämé, Raghunätha 
Bhaööa Gosvämé, Çré Jéva Gosvämé, Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé, and 
Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé.
ei chay gosäir kori caraëa vandan
jähä hoite bighna-näç abhéñöa-püraë (5)
	
I offer my obeisances to the feet of these six Gosvämés. By bowing 
to them, all obstacles to devotion are destroyed and all spiritual desires 
are fulfilled.
ei chay gosäi jär—mui tär däs
tä-sabära pada-reëu mora païca-gräs (6)
	
I am the servant of that person who is a servant of these six 
Gosvämés. The dust of their lotus feet is my five kinds of foodstuffs.
tädera caraëa-sebi-bhakta-sane bäs
janame janame hoy ei abhiläñ (7)
	
This is my desire: that birth after birth I may live with those 
devotees who serve the lotus feet of these six Gosvämés.
ei chay gosäi jabe braje koilä bäs
rädhä-kåñëa-nitya-lélä korilä prakäç (8)
	
When these six Gosvämés lived in Vraja they revealed the lost holy 
places and explained the eternal pastimes of Rädhä and Kåñëa.


===== PAGE 47 / 131 =====

41
änande bolo hari bhaja båndäban
çré-guru-vaiñëaba-pade majäiyä man (9)
	
Just chant the names of Lord Hari in great ecstasy and worship 
the transcendental realm of Våndävana while absorbing your mind 
in meditation upon the divine feet of the spiritual master and the 
Vaiñëavas.
çré-guru-vaiñëaba-pada-padma kori äç
narottama däsa kohe näma-saìkértana (10)
Desiring to serve the lotus feet of Çré Guru and the Vaiñëavas, 
Narottama däsa sings this saìkértana of the holy names of Lord 
Hari.
Bhajahü Re Mana Çré Nanda-nandana
(by Govinda Däsa Kaviräja)
bhajahü re mana çré-nanda-nandana
abhaya-caraëäravinda re
durlabha mänava-janama sat-saìge
taroho e bhava-sindhu re (1)
	
O mind, just worship the lotus feet of the son of Nanda, which 
make one fearless. Having obtained this rare human birth, cross over 
this ocean of worldly existence through the association of saintly 
persons.
çéta ätapa bäta bariñaëa
e dina jäminé jägi re
biphale sevinu kåpaëa durajana
capala sukha-laba lägi’ re (2)
	
Day and night I remain sleepless, suffering heat and cold, wind 


===== PAGE 48 / 131 =====

42
and rain. For a bit of flickering happiness I have vainly served wicked 
and miserly men.
e dhana, yaubana, putra, parijana
ithe ki äche paratéti re
kamala-dala-jala, jévana öalamala
bhajahü hari-pada néti re (3)
	
What assurance of real happiness is there in all of one’s wealth, 
youthfulness, sons, and family members? This life is tottering like a 
drop of water on a lotus petal; therefore you should always serve and 
worship the divine feet of Lord Hari.
çravaëa, kértana, smaraëa, vandana,
päda-sevana, däsya re
püjana, sakhé-jana, ätma-nivedana
govinda-däsa-abhiläña re (4)
	
Govinda Däsa longs to hear the glories of Lord Hari, chant His 
glories, constantly remember Him, offer Him prayers, serve His lotus 
feet, become His servant, worship Him, serve Him as a friend, and 
completely offer Him his very self.
Çré Vraja-dhäma-mahimämåta
(The Nectarean Glories of Vraja-dhäma)
jaya rädhe, jaya kåñëa, jaya våndävan 
çré govinda, gopénätha, madana-mohan (1)
	
All glories to Rädhä and Kåñëa and the divine forest of Våndävana! 
All glories to the three presiding Deities of Våndävana - Çré Govinda, 
Gopénätha, and Madana-mohana!


===== PAGE 49 / 131 =====

43
çyama-kunòa, rädhä-kuëòa, giri-govardhan 
kälindi jamunä jaya, jaya mahävan (2)
	
All glories to Çyäma-kuëòa and Rädhä-kuëòa, Govardhana Hill, 
and the Yamunä river (Kälindé)! All glories to the great forest known 
as Mahävana, where Kåñëa and Balaräma displayed Their childhood 
pastimes!
keçé-ghäöa, vaàçi-vaöa, dwädaça-känan 
jähä saba lélä koilo çré-nanda-nandan (3)
	
Glories to Keçé-ghäöa, where Kåñëa killed the Keçé demon! All 
glories to the Vaàçé-vaöa tree, to which Kåñëa attracted all the gopés 
by playing His flute! Glories to all twelve forests of Vraja! At these 
places the son of Nanda, Çré Kåñëa, performed His pastimes.
çré-nanda-jaçodä jaya, jaya gopa-gaë 
çrédämädi jaya, jaya dhenu-vatsa-gaë (4)
	
All glories to Kåñëa’s father and mother, Nanda and Yaçodä! All 
glories to the cowherd boys, headed by Çrédämä! All glories to the 
cows and calves of Vraja!
jaya båñabhänu, jaya kértidä sundaré 
jaya paurëamäsé, jaya äbhéra-nägaré (5)
	
All glories to Rädhä’s father and mother, Våñabhänu and the 
beautiful Kértidä! All glories to Paurëamäsé, the mother of Sändépani 
Muni, grandmother of Madhumaìgala, and beloved disciple of Devarñi 
Närada! All glories to the young cowherd maidens of Vraja! 
jaya jaya gopéçwara våndävana-mäjh 
jaya jaya kåñëa-sakhä baöu dwija-räj (6)
	
All glories, all glories to Gopéçvara Çiva, who resides in Våndävana 


===== PAGE 50 / 131 =====

44
to protect the holy dhäma! All glories, all glories to Kåñëa’s funny 
brähmaëa friend, Madhumaìgala!
jaya räma-ghäta, jaya rohiëé-nandan 
jaya jaya våndävana-bäsé jata jan (7)
	
All glories to Räma-ghäöa, where Lord Balaräma performed His räsa 
dance! All glories to Lord Balaräma, the son of Rohiëé! All glories, all 
glories to all the residents of Våndävana!
jaya dwija-patné, jaya näga-kanyä-gaë 
bhaktite jähärä päilo govinda-caraë (8)
	
All glories to the wives of the proud Vedic brähmaëas! All glories 
to the wives of the Käliya serpent! Through pure devotion they all 
obtained the lotus feet of Lord Govinda.
çré-räsa-maëòala jaya, jaya rädhä-çyäm 
jaya jaya räsa-lélä sarva-manoram (9)
	
All glories to the place where Çré Kåñëa performed His räsa dance! 
All glories to Rädhä and Çyäm! All glories, all glories to the divine räsa 
dance, the most beautiful of all Lord Kåñëa’s pastimes!
jaya jayojjwala-rasa sarva-rasa-sär 
parakéyä-bhäve jähä brajete pracär (10)
	
All glories, all glories to the mellow of conjugal love, which is the 
most excellent of all rasas and which Çré Kåñëa propagates in Vraja in 
the form of parakéyä-bhäva (paramour love)!
çré-jähnavä-päda-padma koriyä smaraë 
déna kåñëa-däsa kohe näma-saìkértan (11)
Remembering the lotus feet of Lord Nityänanda’s consort, Çré 


===== PAGE 51 / 131 =====

45
Jähnavä Devé, this very fallen and lowly servant of Kåñëa sings the 
saìkértana of the holy name.
Çré Dämodaräñöaka
	
(found in the Padma Puräëa of Kåñëa Dvaipäyana Vyäsa, 
spoken by Satyavrata Muni in a conversation with Närada Muni and 
 Çaunaka Åñi)
	
“In the month of Kärtika one should worship Lord Dämodara 
and daily recite the prayer known as Dämodaräñöaka, which has been 
spoken by the sage Satyavrata and which attracts Lord Dämodara.’’
(Çré Hari-bhakti-viläsa 2.16.198)
namäméçvaraà sac-cid-änanda-rüpaà
lasat-kuëòalaà gokule bhräjamänam
yaçodä-bhiyolükhaläd dhävamänaà
parämåñöam atyantato drutya gopyä (1)
To the Supreme Lord, whose form is the embodiment of eternal 
existence, knowledge, and bliss, whose shark-shaped earrings are 
swinging to and fro, who is beautifully shining in the divine realm of 
Gokula, who [due to the offense of breaking the pot of yogurt that 
His mother was churning into butter and then stealing the butter that 
was kept hanging from a swing] is quickly running from the wooden 
grinding mortar in fear of mother Yaçodä, but who has been caught 
from behind by her who ran after Him with greater speed—to that 
Supreme Lord, Çré Dämodara, I offer my humble obeisances.
rudantaà muhur netra-yugmaà måjantaà
karämbhoja-yugmena sätaìka-netram
muhuù çväsa-kampa-trirekhäìka-kaëöha-
sthita-graivaà dämodaraà bhakti-baddham (2)


===== PAGE 52 / 131 =====

46
	
[Seeing the whipping stick in His mother’s hand,] He is crying and 
rubbing His eyes again and again with His two lotus hands. His eyes 
are filled with fear, and the necklace of pearls around His neck, which 
is marked with three lines like a conchshell, is shaking because of His 
quick breathing due to crying. To this Supreme Lord, Çré Dämodara, 
whose belly is bound not with ropes but with His mother’s pure love, 
I offer my humble obeisances.
itédåk sva-léläbhir änanda-kuëòe
sva-ghoñaà nimajjantam äkhyäpayantam
tadéyeñita-jïeñu bhaktair jitatvaà
punaù prematas taà çatävåtti vande (3)
By such childhood pastimes as this, He is drowning the inhabitants 
of Gokula in pools of ecstasy, and is revealing to those devotees who 
are absorbed in knowledge of His supreme majesty and opulence that 
He is only conquered by devotees whose pure love is imbued with 
intimacy and is free from all conceptions of awe and reverence. With 
great love, I again offer my obeisances to Lord Dämodara hundreds 
and hundreds of times.
varaà deva mokñaà na mokñävadhià vä
na cänyaà våëe ’haà vareñäd apéha
idaà te vapur nätha gopäla-bälaà
sadä me manasy ävirästäà kim anyaiù (4)
	
O Lord, although You are able to give all kinds of benedictions, I do 
not pray to You for the boon of impersonal liberation, nor the highest 
liberation of eternal life in Vaikuëöha, nor any other boon [which may 
be obtained by executing the nine processes of bhakti]. O Lord, I 
simply wish that this form of Yours as Bäla Gopäla in Våndävana may 


===== PAGE 53 / 131 =====

47
ever be manifest in my heart, for what is the use to me of any other 
boon besides this?
idaà te mukhämbhojam atyanta-nélair
våtaà kuntalaiù snigdha-raktaiç ca gopyä
muhuç cumbitaà bimba-raktädharaà me
manasy ävirästäm alaà lakña-läbhaiù (5)
	
O Lord, Your lotus face, which is encircled by locks of soft black 
hair tinged with red, is kissed again and again by mother Yaçodä, and 
Your lips are reddish like the bimba fruit. May this beautiful vision of 
Your lotus face be ever manifest in my heart. Thousands and thousands 
of other benedictions are of no use to me.
namo deva dämodaränanta viñëo
praséda prabho duùkha-jäläbdhi-magnam
kåpä-dåñöi-våñöyäti-dénaà batänu
gåhäëeña mäm ajïam edhy akñi-dåçyaù (6)
	
O Supreme Godhead, I offer my obeisances unto You. O Dämodara! 
O Ananta! O Viñëu! O master! O my Lord, be pleased upon me. By 
showering Your glance of mercy upon me, deliver this poor ignorant 
fool who is immersed in an ocean of worldly sorrows, and become 
visible to my eyes.
kuverätmajau baddha-mürtyaiva yadvat
tvayä mocitau bhakti-bhäjau kåtau ca
tathä prema-bhaktià svakäà me prayaccha
na mokñe graho me ‘sti dämodareha (7)
	
O Lord Dämodara, just as the two sons of Kuvera—Maëigréva 
and Nalaküvara—were delivered from the curse of Närada and made 


===== PAGE 54 / 131 =====

48
into great devotees by You in Your form as a baby tied with rope to 
a wooden grinding mortar, in the same way, please give to me Your 
own prema-bhakti. I only long for this and have no desire for any kind 
of liberation.
namas te ’stu dämne sphurad-dépti-dhämne
tvadéyodaräyätha viçvasya dhämne
namo rädhikäyai tvadéya-priyäyai
namo ’nanta-léläya deväya tubhyam (8)
	
O Lord  Dämodara, I first of all offer my obeisances to the 
brilliantly effulgent rope which binds Your belly. I then offer my 
obeisances to Your belly, which is the abode of the entire universe. 
I humbly bow down to Your most beloved Çrématé Rädhäräëé, and I 
offer all obeisances to You, the Supreme Lord, who displays unlimited 
pastimes.
Çré Rädhikä-stava
(from Stava-mälä by Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé)
(chorus)
rädhe jaya jaya mädhava-dayite
gokula-taruëé-maëòala-mahite
(chorus) O Rädhä! O beloved of Mädhava! O You who are 
worshiped by all the young girls of Gokula! All glories unto You! All 
glories unto You!
dämodara-rati-vardhana-veçe
hari-niñkuöa-våndä-vipineçe (1)
O You who dress Yourself in such a way as to increase Lord 


===== PAGE 55 / 131 =====

49
Dämodara’s love and attachment for You! O Queen of Våndävana, 
which is the pleasure grove of Lord Hari!
våñabhänüdadhi-nava-çaçi-lekhe
lalitä-sakhi guëa-ramita-viçäkhe (2)
O new moon who has arisen from the ocean of King Våñabhänu! 
O friend of Lalitä! O You who make Viçäkhä loyal to You due to 
Your wonderful qualities of friendliness, kindness, and faithfulness 
to Kåñëa!
karuëäà kuru mayi karuëä-bharite
sanaka-sanätana-varëita-carite (3)
O You who are filled with compassion! O You whose divine 
characteristics are described by the great sages Sanaka and Sanätana! 
O Rädhä, please be merciful to me!


===== PAGE 56 / 131 =====

50
Sapärñada-bhagavad-viraha-janita-viläpa
(Lamentation due to separation from the Lord and His associates)
from Prärthanä by Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura
je änilo prema-dhana koruëä pracur
heno prabhu kothä gelä äcärya-öhäkur (1)
He who brought the treasure of divine love and who was filled 
with compassion and mercy—where has such a personality as Çréniväsa 
Äcärya gone?
kähä mora swarüp rüpa kähä sanätan
kähä däsa raghunätha patita-pävan (2)
Where are my Svarüpa Dämodara and Rüpa Gosvämé? Where is 
Sanätana? Where is Raghunätha däsa, the savior of the fallen?
kähä mora bhaööa-juga kähä kaviräj
eka-käle kothä gelä gorä naöa-räj (3)
Where are my Raghunätha Bhaööa and Gopäla Bhaööa, and where 
is Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja? Where did Lord Gauräìga, the great dancer, 
suddenly go?
päñäëe kuöibo mäthä anale paçibo
gauräìga guëera nidhi kothä gele päbo (4)
I will smash my head against the rock and enter into the fire. Where 
will I find Lord Gauräìga, the reservoir of all wonderful qualities?
se-saba saìgéra saìge je koilo biläs 
se-saìga nä päiyä kände narottama däs (5)
Unable to obtain the association of Lord Gauräìga accompanied by 
all of these devotees in whose association He performed His pastimes, 
Narottama däsa simply weeps.


===== PAGE 57 / 131 =====

51
An Introduction
Living in the association of Krishna’s devotees in a temple or 
ashrama makes it easier to practise devotional service. But if you’re 
determined, you can follow at home the teachings of Krishna 
consciousness and thus convert your home into a temple.
Spiritual life, like material life, means practical activity. The 
difference is that whereas we perform material activities for the benefit 
of ourselves or those we consider ours, we per­form spiritual activities 
for the benefit of Lord Krishna, under the guidance of the scriptures and 
the spiritual master. The key is to accept the guidance of the scripture 
and the guru. Krishna declares in the Bhagavad-gita that a person can 
achieve neither happiness nor the supreme destination of life — going 
Back to Godhead, back to Lord Krishna—if he or she does not follow 
the injunctions of the scriptures. And how to follow the scriptural 
rules by engaging in practical service to the Lord—that is explained 
by a bonafide spiritual master. Without following the instructions of a 
spiritual master who is in an authorized chain of disciplic succession 
coming from Krishna Himself, we cannot make spiritual progress. 
The prac­tices outlined here are the timeless practices of bhakti-yoga 
as given by the foremost spiritual master and exponent of Krishna 
consciousness in our time, His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami 
Prabhupada, founder-acharya of the International Society for Krishna 
Consciousness (ISKCON).
4.	Krishna Consciousness at Home


===== PAGE 58 / 131 =====

52
The purpose of spiritual knowledge is to bring us closer to God. 
Krishna says in the Bhagavad-gita (18.55), bhaktyä mäm abhijänäti: “I 
can be known only by devotional service.” Knowl­edge guides us in 
proper action. Spiritual knowledge directs us to satisfy the desires of 
Krishna through practical engage­ments in His loving service. Without 
practical application, theoretical knowledge is of little value. Spiritual 
knowledge is meant to direct us in all aspects of life. We should 
endeavor, therefore, to organize our lives in such a way as to follow 
Krishna’s teachings as far as possible. We should try to do our best, to 
do more than is simply convenient. Then it will be possible for us to 
rise to the transcendental plane of Krishna consciousness, even while 
living far from a temple.
Chanting the Hare Krishna Mantra
The first principle in devotional service is to chant the Hare Krishna 
mahä-mantra (mahä means “great”; mantra means “sound that liberates 
the mind from ignorance”):
Hare Krishna Hare  Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare  
Hare Rama Hare Rama  Rama Rama  Hare Hare
You can chant these holy names of the Lord anywhere and at any 
time, but it is best to set a specific time of the day to regularly chant. 
Early morning hours are ideal.
The chanting can be done in two ways: singing the mantra, called 
kirtana (usually done in a group), and saying the mantra to oneself, 
called japa (which literally means “to speak softly”). Concentrate on 
hearing the sound of the holy names. As you chant, pronounce the 
names clearly and distinctly, addressing Krishna in a prayerful mood. 


===== PAGE 59 / 131 =====

53
When your mind wanders, bring it back to the sound of the Lord’s 
names. Chanting is a prayer to Krishna that means “O energy of the 
Lord [Hare], O all-attractive Lord [Krishna], O Supreme Enjoyer 
[Räma], please engage me in Your service.” The more attentively and 
sin­cerely you chant these names of God, the more spiritual progress 
you will make.
Since God is all-powerful and all-merciful, He has kindly made it 
very easy for us to chant His names, and He has also invested all His 
powers in them. Therefore the names of God and God Himself are 
identical. This means that when we chant the holy names of Krishna 
and Räma, we are directly associat­ing with God and being purified. 
Therefore we should always try to chant with devotion and reverence. 
The Vedic litera­ture states that Lord Krishna is personally dancing on 
your tongue when you chant His holy name.
When you chant alone, it is best to chant on japa beads (available 
at the 1SKCON temple). This not only helps you fix your attention on 
the holy name, but it also helps you count the number of times you 
chant the mantra daily. Each strand of japa beads contains 108 small 
beads and one large bead, the head bead. Begin on a bead next to the 
head bead and gently hold it between the thumb and middle finger of 
your right hand as you chant the full Hare Krishna mantra. Then move 
to the next bead and repeat the process. In this way, chant on each of 
the 108 beads until you reach the head bead again. This is one round 
of japa. Then, without chanting on the head bead, reverse the beads 
and start your second round on the last bead you chanted on.
Initiated devotees vow before the spiritual master to chant at least 
sixteen rounds of the  Hare Krishna mantra daily. But even if you can 


===== PAGE 60 / 131 =====

54


===== PAGE 61 / 131 =====

55
chant only one round a day, the principle is that once you commit 
yourself to chanting that round, you should try and complete it every 
day without fail. When you feel you can chant more, then increase the 
minimum number of rounds you chant each day—but don’t fall below 
that number. You can chant more than your fixed number, but you 
should maintain a set minimum each day. (Please note that the beads 
are sacred and therefore should never touch the ground or be put in 
an unclean place. To keep your beads clean, it’s best to carry them in 
a special bead bag, also available at the ISKCON temple.)
Aside from chanting japa, you can also sing the Lord’s holy names 
in kirtana. While you can perform kirtana individually, it is generally 
performed with others. A melodious kirtana with family or friends is 
sure to enliven everyone. ISKCON devotees use traditional melodies 
and instruments, especially in the temple, but you can chant to any 
melody and use any musical instruments to accompany your chanting. 
As Lord Chaitanya said, “There are no hard and fast rules for chanting 
Hare Krishna.”
Ten Offenses
against chanting the holy name
The offenses against the chanting of the holy name are as follows:
(1) To blaspheme the devotees who have dedicated their lives 
for propagating the holy name of the Lord. (2) To con­sider the 
names of demigods like Lord Shiva or Lord Brahma to be equal to, or 
independent of the name of Lord Vishnu. (Sometimes the atheistic 
class of men take it that any demigod is as good as the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Vishnu. But one who is a devotee knows that 
no demigod, however great he may be, is independently as good as the 


===== PAGE 62 / 131 =====

56
Supreme Per­sonality of Godhead. Therefore, if someone thinks that he 
can chant “Kali, Kali!” or “Durga, Durga!” and it is the same as Hare 
Krishna, that is the greatest offense.) (3) To disobey the orders of the 
spiritual master. (4) To blaspheme the Vedic literature or literature in 
pursuance of the Vedic version. (5) To consider the glories of chanting 
Hare Krishna to be imagi­nation. (6) To give some interpretation to the 
holy name of the Lord. (7) To commit sinful activities on the strength 
of the holy name of the Lord. (It should not be taken that because by 
chanting the holy name of the Lord one can be freed from all kinds of 
sinful reaction, one may continue to act sinfully and after that chant 
Hare Krishna to neutralize his sins. Such a dangerous mentality is 
very offensive and should be avoided.) (8) To consider the chanting 
of Hare Krishna as one of the auspicious ritualistic activities offered in 
the Vedas as fruitive activities (karma-kända). (9) To instruct a faithless 
person about the glories of the holy name. (Anyone can take part in 
chant­ing the holy name of the Lord, but in the beginning one should 
not be instructed about the transcendental potency of the Lord. Those 
who are too sinful cannot appreciate the transcendental glories of the 
Lord, and therefore it is better not to instruct them in this matter.) 
(10) To not have complete faith in the chanting of the holy names and 
to maintain material attach­ments, even after understanding so many 
instructions on this matter.
Every devotee who claims to be a Vaishnava must guard against 
these offenses in order to quickly achieve the desired success. 
(Excerpts from Nectar of Devotion)


===== PAGE 63 / 131 =====

57
Everyday Life: 
The Four Regulative Principles
Anyone serious about progressing in Krishna consciousness must 
avoid the following four sinful activities:
1. Eating meat, fish or eggs. These foods are saturated with the 
modes of passion and ignorance and therefore cannot be offered to 
the Lord.
2. Gambling. Gambling invariably puts one into anxiety and fuels 
greed, envy, and anger.
3. The use of intoxicants. Drugs, alcohol, and tobacco, as well as 
any drinks or foods containing caffeine, cloud the mind, overstimulate 
the senses, and make it impossible to understand or follow the 
principles of bhakti-yoga.
4. Illicit sex. This is sex outside of marriage or sex in mar­riage for 
any purpose other than procreation.
Marking the Body with Vishnu-tilaka
(ürdhva-puëòra)
Tilaka refers to marks placed on the body using various substances. 
Urdhva-pundra refers to the two vertical marks placed on the forehead 
and other parts of the body to indicate surrender to Lord Vishnu. The 
Padma Purana and Yajur Veda state that urdhva-pundra symbolizes the 
lotus foot of Vishnu. In the Padma Purana it is said: “Persons who mark 
twelve places of their bodies as Vishnu temples with Vishnu’s symbolic 
representations, and who have vishnu tilaka on their foreheads, are 
to be understood as the devotees of Lord Vishnu in this world. Their 
presence makes the world purified, and anywhere they remain, they 


===== PAGE 64 / 131 =====

58
make that place as good as Vaikuntha. A similar statement is in the 
Skanda Purana, which says, “Persons who are decorated with tilaka 
or gopi-candana are never approached by the Yamadutas.”
If a devotee applies the marks of the Lord and chants His name, the 
Lord becomes pleased and resides with him. In this way the material 
body becomes a sanctified temple of the Lord. The Brahmänòa Puräëa 
states that a devotee who applies his tilaka with great care while 
looking in a mirror or looking at his re­flection in water goes to the 
Lord’s supreme abode.
The tilaka is applied to twelve parts of the body — that is, on the 
forehead, navel, heart, throat, sides of the abdomen, arms, shoulders, 
nape of the neck, and lower back. Applying tilaka on these places 
and reciting Vishnu’s names sanctifies and dedicates the body to the 
Lord’s service.
While decorating the body with tilaka, one gives protection to 
the body by chanting different names of Vishnu. Tilaka is applied 


===== PAGE 65 / 131 =====

59
to the other parts of the body in the same fashion as it is applied to 
the forehead. One should mix tilaka in the palm of one’s left hand 
(or premix it in a small container) and apply it with the ring finger 
of the right hand to twelve places on the body while chanting the 
following mantras:
(When applying tilaka to the right side of the body transfer it from 
the ball of the right ring finger onto the ball of the left ring finger.)
The forehead 	
oà keçaväya namaù
The abdomen 	
oà näräyaëäya namaù
The chest 	
oà mädhaväya namaù
The throat 	
oà govindäya namaù
The right side of abdomen	
oà viñëave namaù
The right arm 	
oà madhusüdanäya namaù
The right shoulder 	
oà trivikramäya namaù
The left side  of abdomen	
oà vämanäya namaù
The left arm 	
oà çrédharäya namaù
The left shoulder 	
oà håñékeçäya namaù
The upper back 	
oà padmanäbhäya namaù
The lower back 	
oà dämodaräya namaù
Whatever tilaka is left over should be wiped in the region of the 
sikha with the mantra oà väsudeväya namaù


===== PAGE 66 / 131 =====

60
Setting Up Your Altar
You  are  likely to find that your japa and kirtana are espe­cially 
effective when done before an altar.
Setting up an altar at home means receiving the Lord and His pure 
devotees as your most honored guests. Where should you set up the 
altar? Well, how would you seat a guest? An ideal place would be 
clean, well lit, and free from drafts and household disturbances. Your 
guest, of course, would need a comfortable chair, but for the picture 
of Krishna’s form, a wall shelf, a mantelpiece, a corner table, or the 
top shelf of a book­case will do.
What do you need for an altar? Here are the essentials:
1. A picture of Srila Prabhupada.
2. A picture of Lord Chaitanya and His associates.
3. A picture of Sri Sri Radha-Krishna.


===== PAGE 67 / 131 =====

61
In addition, you may want an altar cloth, water cups (one for each 
picture), a lamp, a special plate for of­fering food, a small bell, incense, 
an incense holder, and fresh flowers, which you may offer in vases or 
simply place before each picture. If you’re interested in more elaborate 
Deity wor­ship, consult the devotees at the ISKCON temple.
You can arrange the pictures in a triangle, with the picture of 
Srila Prabhupada on the left, the picture of Lord Chaitanya and His 
associates on the right, and the picture of Radha and Krishna, which, 
if possible, should be slightly larger than the others, on a small raised 
platform behind and in the center. Or you can hang the picture of 
Radha and Krishna on the wall above.
Carefully clean the altar each morning. Cleanliness is es­sential in 
Deity worship. Remember, you wouldn’t neglect to clean the room 
of an important guest, and when you establish an altar you invite 
Krishna and His pure devotees to reside as the most exalted guests in 
your home. If you have water cups, rinse them out and fill them with 
fresh water daily. Then place them conveniently close to the pictures. 
You should re­move flowers in vases as soon as they’re slightly wilted, 
or daily if you’ve offered them at the base of the pictures. You should 
offer fresh incense at least once a day, and, if possible, offer a lamp and 
place it near the pictures when you’re chanting before the altar.
Please try the things we’ve suggested so far. It’s very simple, really: 
if you try to love God, you’ll gradually realize how much He loves you. 
That’s the essence of bhakti-yoga.
Prasadam: How to Prepare and Offer Food
Food prepared for and offered to Krishna with love and devotion 
becomes completely spiritualized. Such food is called Krishna 
prasädam, which means “the mercy of Lord Krishna.”


===== PAGE 68 / 131 =====

62
Lord Chaitanya said of prasadam, “Everyone has tasted these 
foods before.  However, now that they have been prepared for 
Krishna and offered to Him with devotion, these foods have acquired 
extraordinary tastes and uncommon fragrances.   Just taste them and 
see the difference in the experience!    Apart from the taste, even the 
fragrance pleases the mind and makes one forget any other fragrance. 
Therefore, it should be under­stood that the spiritual nectar of Krishna’s 
lips must have touched these ordinary foods and imparted to them all 
their transcendental qualities.”
Eating only food offered to Krishna is the perfection of veg­
etarianism. In the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krishna says that unless one 
eats only food that has been offered to Him in sacrifice, one will suffer 
the reactions of karma. He also states, “If one offers Me with love and 
devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or water, I will accept it.” From this 
verse it is understood that we can offer Krishna foods prepared from 
milk products, veg­etables, fruits, nuts, and grains. Meat, fish and eggs 
are not offerable. And a few vegetarian items are also forbidden— garlic 
and onions, for example, which are in the mode of dark­ness. (Hing, 
or asafoetida, is a tasty substitute for them in cook­ing.) Nor can you 
offer Krishna coffee or tea.
In preparing food, cleanliness is the most important principle. 
Nothing impure should be offered to God, so keep your kitchen very 
clean. Always wash your hands thoroughly be­fore entering the kitchen. 
While preparing food, do not taste it, for you are cooking the meal not 
for yourself but for the plea­sure of Krishna. Arrange positions of the 
food on dinnerware kept especially for this purpose; no one but the 
Lord should eat from these dishes. The easiest way to offer food is 
simply to pray, “My dear Lord Krishna, please accept this food,” and to 
chant each of the following prayers three times while ring­ing a bell.


===== PAGE 69 / 131 =====

63
1. Prayer to Srila Prabhupada:
nama oà viñëu-pädäya kåñëa-preñöhäya bhü-tale 
çrémate bhaktivedänta-svämin iti nämine
namas te särasvate deve gaura-väëé-pracäriëe 
nirviçeña-çünyavädi-päçcätya-deça-täriëe
2. Prayer to Lord Chaitanya:
namo mahä-vadänyäya kåñëa-prema-pradäya te 
kåñëäya kåñëa-caitanya-nämne gaura-tviñe namaù
3. Prayer to Lord Krishna:
namo brahmaëya-deväya go-brähmaëa-hitäya ca 
jagad-dhitäya kåñëäya govindäya namo namaù
“I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Krishna, who is the 
worshipable Deity for all brahmanas, the well-wisher of the cows and 
the brahmanas, and the benefactor of the whole world. I offer my 
repeated obeisances to the Personality of Godhead, known as Krishna 
and Govinda.”
Remember that the real purpose of preparing and offering food 
to the Lord is to show your devotion and gratitude to Him. God is 
complete in Himself—He doesn’t need anything— but out of His 
immense kindness He allows us to offer food to Him so that we can 
develop our love for Him.
After offering the food to the Lord, wait at least five min­utes for 
Him to partake of the preparations. Then you should transfer the food 
from the special dinnerware and wash the dishes and utensils you used 
for the offering. Now you and any guests may eat the prasadam. While 
you eat, try to appre­ciate the spiritual value of the food. Remember 


===== PAGE 70 / 131 =====

64
that because Krishna has accepted it, it is nondifferent from Him, and 
there­fore by eating it you will become purified.
Everything you offer on your altar becomes prasädam, the mercy 
of the Lord. Flowers, incense, the water, the food— everything you 
offer for the Lord’s pleasure becomes spiritu­alized. Thus remnants 
of everything offered to the Lord are nondifferent from Him. So you 
should not only deeply respect the things you’ve offered, but you 
should dis­tribute them to others as well. Distribution of prasadam is 
an essential part of Deity worship.
Honouring Prasäda
(from Mahäbhärata, Skanda Puräëa)
mahä-prasäde govinde näma-brahmaëi vaiñëave 
svalpa-puëya-vatäà räjan viçväso naiva jäyate
	
O king, for those with little pious credit, faith in mahä-prasäda, 
Çré Govinda, the holy name, and the Vaiñëavas never arises.
Prasäda-seväya
(from Gétävalé by Çréla Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura)
bhäi-re! 
çaréra avidyä-jäl, joòendriya tähe käl, 
jéve phele viñaya-sägore 
tä’ra madhye jihvä ati, lobhamoy sudurmati, 
tä’ke jetä kaöhina saàsäre (1)


===== PAGE 71 / 131 =====

65
Ekadashi
(Extracts from the teachings of His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta 
Swami Prabhupada)
In devotional service there are certain activities which are called 
determined such as fasting on certain days like the elev­enth day of the 
moon, Ekadashi and on other days like ap­pearance day of the Lord. 
The Ekadashi day which comes twice a month, occurs on the eleventh 
— day after the full moon and the eleventh day after the new moon. 
On such days no grains, cereals or beans are eaten; simply vegetables 
and milk** are moderately taken, and chanting Hare Krishna and 
reading scriptures are increased.
	
O brothers! This material body is a network of ignorance, and 
the senses are one’s deadly enemies, for they throw the soul into the 
ocean of material sense enjoyment. Among the senses, the tongue is 
the most voracious and verily wicked; it is very difficult to conquer 
the tongue in this world.
kåñëa baòo doyämoy, koribäre jihvä jay, 
sva-prasäd-anna dilo bhäi 
sei annämåta päo, rädhä-kåñëa-guëa gäo, 
preme òäko caitanya-nitäi (2)
	
O brothers! Lord Kåñëa is very merciful - just to control the tongue 
He has given us the remnants of His own food! Now please eat these 
nectarean grains while singing the glories of Their Lordships Çré Çré 
Rädhä and Kåñëa, and in love call out “Caitanya! Nitäi!”
** Devotees observing Ekadashi can also take fruits.


===== PAGE 72 / 131 =====

66
 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purana it is said that one who ob­serves 
fasting on Ekadashi day is freed from all kinds of reac­tions to sinful 
activities and advances in pious life. The basic principle is not just 
to fast, but to increase one’s faith and love for Govinda, or Krishna. 
The real reason for observing fasting on Ekadashi is to minimize the 
demands of the body and to engage our time in the service of the Lord 
by chanting or per­forming similar service.
The injunction to fast on Ekadashi is especially meant for devotees; 
on Ekadashi there are no restrictions regarding food­stuffs that may 
be offered to the Lord. On Ekadashi, everything is cooked for Vishnu, 
including regular grains and dahl. How­ever it is strictly forbidden for 
one to accept any kind of grain on Ekadashi, even if it is offered to 
Lord Vishnu.
To observe Ekadashi-vrata means to please the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Those interested in advancing in Krishna consciousness 
must observe Ekadashi-vrata regularly. Ekadashi fast is broken on the 
next day i.e. Dvadashi by tak­ing grains  immediately after sunrise.  All 
these rules and regulations are offered by the great acharyas for those 
who are actually interested in getting ad­mission into the association of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental world.


===== PAGE 73 / 131 =====

67
The important items of Sadhana Bhakti are mentioned in the 
shastras as follows:
guru-pädäçraya, dékñä, 
gurura sevana 
sad-dharma-çikñä, påcchä,  
sädhu-märgänugamana
“On the path of regulative devotional service, one must observe the 
following items: (1) one must accept a bona fide spiritual master. (2) 
accept initiation from him. (3) serve him. (4) receive instructions from 
the spiritual master and make inquiries in order to learn devotional 
service. (5) follow in the footsteps of the previous äcäryas and follow 
the directions given by the spiritual master.” (CC Madhya 22.115)
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 
the founder-acharya of the International Society for Krishna 
Consciousness, eleborates on guru-pädäçraya in a lecture as:
“Ädau gurväçrayam. First thing is to accept a bona fide guru. 
Otherwise there is no devotion. It is simply false imitation. This is 
the injunction of Rüpa Gosvämé in Bhakti-rasämåta sindhu. 
Ädau gurväçrayam: “your first business is to approach bona fide 
guru and take his äçraya.” Otherwise there is no devotion.” 
(Evening lecture- Bhubaneswar, January 23, 1977)
Açraya means to act under the direction and supervision of the 
spiritual master. Srila Prabhupada writes in the introduction to the 
Bhagavad-gita As It Is:
5.	 Srila Prabhupada Ashraya Program


===== PAGE 74 / 131 =====

68
tasmät sarveñu käleñu 
mäm anusmara yudhya ca 
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir 
mäm evaiñyasy asaàçayaù
“Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of 
Krishna and at the same time continue your prescribed duty of fighting. 
With your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence 
fixed on Me, you will attain Me without doubt. (Bg. 8.7)
“He (Krishna) does not advise Arjuna simply to remember Him 
and give up his occupation. No, the Lord never suggests anything 
impractical. In this material world, in order to maintain the body one 
has to work. Human society is divided, according to work, into four 
divisions of social order - brahmana, kshatriya, vaishya and sudra. 
The brahmana class or intelligent class is working in one way, the 
kshatriya or admin­istrative class is working in another way, and the 
mercantile class and the laborer are all tending to their specific duties. 
In the human society whether one is laborer, merchant, administrator, 
or farmer, or even if one belongs to the highest class and is a literary 
man, a scientist or a theologian, he has to work in order to maintain 
his existence. The Lord therefore tells Arjuna that he need not give 
up his occupation, but while he is engaged in his occupa­tion he 
should remember Krishna (mäm anusmara). If he doesn’t practice 
remembering Krishna while he is struggling for exist­ence, then it 
will not be possible for him to remember Krishna at the time of 
death. Lord Chaitanya also advises this. There­fore we have to practice 
remembering the Lord always, twenty four hours a day, by chanting 
His names and molding our life’s activities in such a way that we can 
remember Him always.”


===== PAGE 75 / 131 =====

69
Undoubtedly it is important for everyone to practise Krishna 
consciousness or devotional service to Lord Krishna in their life. The 
beauty of Krishna consciousness is that you can take up the practices 
of devotional service to the Lord as much as you are ready, for Krishna 
Himself promises in the Bhagavad-gita: “There is no loss or diminution 
in this endeavor, and even a little advancement on this path protects 
one from the most fearful type of danger.” So bring Krishna into your 
daily life, and soon you will feel the benefit.
The following are the different levels of commitment and standards 
of devotional service that you can practice at home while carrying out 
your normal activities of life. You can choose the level and standard 
that you can most comfortably practice and ISKCON will offer you 
guidance and inspiration to practise at that level and help you to 
gradually reach higher and higher standards.
Levels of Ashraya Program
Srila Prabhupada SHRADDHAVAN
• 
Chant minimum 1 round of Hare Krishna maha mantra every 
day
• 
Read Srila Prabhupada’s books regularly
• 
Attend as many temple programs as possible
• 
Actively participate in Krishnashraya programs near home
• 
Render minimum of 4 hrs of practical devotional service in the 
temple in every quarter of the year (3 months)
• 
Actively participate in Srila Prabhupada’s book distribution for at 
least 4 hrs in every quarter of the year (3 months)


===== PAGE 76 / 131 =====

70
Srila Prabhupada SEVAKA
• 
Chant minimum 4 rounds of Hare Krishna maha mantra every 
day
• 
Min 3 months after taking SP Shraddhavan Ashraya
• 
Read Srila Prabhupada’s books regularly (Read “Beyond birth & 
death” completely for the written test)
• 
Accept Sri Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
• 
Attend as many temple programs as possible
• 
Actively participate in Krishnashraya programs near home
• 
Render minimum of 8 hrs of practical devotional service in the 
temple in every quarter of the year (3 months)
• 
Actively participate in Srila Prabhupada’s book distribution for at 
least 8 hrs in every quarter of the year (3 months)
Srila Prabhupada SADHAKA
• 
Chant minimum 8 rounds of Hare Krishna maha mantra every 
day
• 
Min 3 months after taking SP Sevaka Ashraya
• 
Read Srila Prabhupada’s books regularly (Read “Raja Vidya” & 
“Perfection of Yoga” completely for the written test)
• 
Try to rise early morning and complete the sadhana of chanting, 
worshipping the Lord at home, offering food, etc.
• 
Fasting on Ekadashi & festival days
• 
Actively participate and assist in preaching in Krishnashraya 
programs near home
• 
Render minimum of 12 hrs of practical devotional service in the 
temple in every quarter of the year (3 months)
• 
Actively participate in Srila Prabhupada’s book distribution for at 
least 12 hrs in every quarter of the year (3 months)


===== PAGE 77 / 131 =====

71
• 
Avoid eating non-vegetarian food
Srila Prabhupada VANDANA
• 
Chant minimum 12 rounds of Hare Krishna maha mantra every 
day
• 
Min 3 months after taking SP Sadhaka Ashraya
• 
Read Srila Prabhupada’s books everyday (Read “Science of self 
realization” completely for the written test)
• 
Follow 4 regulative principles as instructed by Srila Prabhupada - 
No illicit sex, gambling, intoxication including coffee & tea, meat 
eating including onion & garlic.
• 
Follow a daily sadhana program including rising early, chanting, a 
simple morning program consisting of one arati, Srila Prabhupada 
Guru Puja & attending/ hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam class
• 
Implement the Krishna Conscious practices at home 
• 
Fast on Ekadashi and festival days
• 
Actively participate and assist in preaching in Krishnashraya 
programs near home
• 
Render minimum of 16 hrs of practical devotional service in the 
temple in every quarter of the year (3 months)
• 
Actively participate in Srila Prabhupada’s book distribution for at 
least 16 hrs in every quarter of the year (3 months)
Srila Prabhupada UPASAKA
• 
Chant minimum 16 rounds of Hare Krishna maha mantra every 
day
• 
Minimum of 3 months after taking SP Vandana Ashraya
• 
Read Srila Prabhupada’s books every day (Read “Bhagavad-gita 
As It Is” from INTRODUCTION to CHAPTER 3 for the written 


===== PAGE 78 / 131 =====

72
test)
• 
Follow 4 regulative principles as instructed by Srila Prabhupada - 
No illicit sex, gambling, intoxication including coffee & tea, meat 
eating including onion & garlic.
• 
Follow a daily sadhana program including rising early, chanting, a 
simple morning program consisting of one arati, Srila Prabhupada 
Guru Puja & attending/ hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam class
• 
Implement the Krishna Conscious practices at home 
• 
Fast on Ekadashi and festival days
• 
Actively participate and assist in preaching in Krishnashraya 
programs near home
• 
Render minimum of 20 hrs of practical devotional service in the 
temple in every quarter of the year (3 months)
• 
Actively participate in Srila Prabhupada’s book distribution for at 
least 20 hrs in every quarter of the year (3 months)
Srila Prabhupada CHARANASHRAYA 
• 
Chant minimum 16 rounds of Hare Krishna maha mantra 
every day
• 
Minimum of 6 months after taking SP Upasaka Ashraya 
• 
Read Srila Prabhupada’s books every day (Read “Bhagavad-gita 
As It Is” from INTRODUCTION to CHAPTER 12 for the written 
test)
• 
Follow 4 regulative principles as instructed by Srila Prabhupada - 
No illicit sex, gambling, intoxication including coffee & tea, meat 
eating including onion & garlic.
• 
Following a daily sadhana program including rising early, chanting, 
a simple morning program consisting of one arati, Srila Prabhupada 
Guru Puja & attending/ hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam class


===== PAGE 79 / 131 =====

73
• 
Implement the Krishna Conscious practices at home 
• 
Fast on Ekadashi and festival days
• 
Actively participate and take lead role as preacher in Krishnashraya 
programs near home
• 
Render minimum of 20 hrs of practical devotional service in the 
temple in every quarter of the year (3 months)
• 
Actively participate in Srila Prabhupada’s book distribution for at 
least 20 hrs in every quarter of the year (3 months)
Ashraya ceremony: On special festival days of the year, the Ashraya 
ceremony will be conducted where the devotees will receive the 
blessings of Sri Sri Radha Krishnachandra formally from the President, 
ISKCON, Bangalore. 
How you can take part in the Ashraya ceremony: Please fill 
out the Ashraya ceremony form (available with Krishnashraya cell 
co-ordinator). Please indicate the level of your practice of Krishna 
consciousness. You will have to write a test and attend an interview 
at the temple on a date which will be announced in the temple. 
Those fortunate devotees who qualify in all respects will be invited 
to participate in the Ashraya ceremony.
For more details contact: Vasudeva Keshava Dasa, Co-ordinator, 
Srila Prabhupada Ashraya Programme, ISKCON, Hare Krishna 
Hill, Chord Road, Rajajinagar, Bangalore - 560 010. Tel: 23471956, 
23578346. 


===== PAGE 80 / 131 =====

74
Çré Brahma-saàhitä
éçvaraù paramaù kåñëaù 
sac-cid-änanda-vigrahaù 
anädir ädir govindaù 
sarva-käraëa-käraëam
cintämaëi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-våkña- 
lakñävåteñu surabhér abhipälayantam 
lakñmé-sahasra-çata-sambhrama-sevyamänaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
veëuà kvaëantam aravinda-daläyatäkñaà 
barhävataàsam asitämbuda-sundaräìgam 
kandarpa-koöi-kaminéya-viçeña-çobhaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
älola-candraka-lasad-vanamälya-vaàçé- 
ratnäìgadaà praëaya-keli-kalä-viläsam 
çyämaà tri-bhaìga-lalitaà niyata-prakäçaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
aìgäni yasya sakalendriya-våtti-manti 
paçyanti pänti kalayanti ciraà jaganti 
änanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
advaitam acyutam anädim ananta-rüpam 
ädyaà puräëa-puruñaà nava-yauvanaà ca 
vedeñu durlabham adurlabham ätma-bhaktau 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
6.	 Prayers


===== PAGE 81 / 131 =====

75
panthäs tu koöi-çata-vatsara-sampragamyo 
väyor athäpi manaso muni-puìgavänäm 
so ‘py asti yat-prapada-sémny avicintya-tattve 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
eko ‘py asau racayituà jagad-aëòa-koöià 
yac-chaktir asti jagad-aëòa-cayä yad antaù 
aëòäntara-stha-paramäëu-cayäntara-sthaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yad-bhäva-bhävita-dhiyo manujäs tathaiva 
sampräpya rüpa-mahimäsana-yäna-bhüñäù 
süktair yam eva nigama-prathitaiù stuvanti 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
änanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhis 
täbhir ya eva nija-rüpataya kaläbhiù 
goloka eva nivasaty akhilätma-bhüto 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
premäïjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena 
santaù sadaiva hådayeñu vilokayanti 
yäà çyämasundaram acintya-guëa-svarüpaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
rämädi-mürtiñu kalä-niyamena tiñöhan 
nänävatäram akarod bhuvaneñu kintu 
kåñëaù svayaà samabhavat paramaù pumän yo 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yasya prabhä prabhavato jagad-aëòa-koöi- 
koöiñv açeña-vasudhädi vibhüti-bhinnam 
tad brahma niñkalam anantam açeña-bhütaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi


===== PAGE 82 / 131 =====

76
mäyä hi yasya jagad-aëòa-çatäni süte 
traiguëya-tad-viñaya-veda-vitäyamänä 
sattvävalambi-para-sattvaà viçuddha-sattvaà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
änanda-cinmaya-rasätmatayä manaùsu 
yaù präëinäà pratiphalan smaratäm upetya 
léläyitena bhuvanäni jayaty ajasraà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
goloka-nämni nija-dhämni tale ca tasya 
devé-maheça-hari-dhämasu teñu teñu 
te te prabhäva-nicayä vihitäç ca yena 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
såñöi-sthiti-pralaya-sädhana-çaktir ekä 
chäyeva yasya bhuvanäni bibharti durgä 
icchänurüpam api yasya ca ceñöate sä 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
kñéraà yathä dadhi vikära-viçeña-yogät 
saïjäyate na hi tataù påthag asti hetoù 
yaù çambhutäm api tathä samupaiti käryäd 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
dépärcir eva hi daçäntaram abhyupetya 
dépäyate vivåta-hetu-samäna-dharmä 
yas tädåg eva hi ca viñëutayä vibhäti 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yaù käraëärëava-jale bhajati sma yoga- 
nidräm ananta-jagad-aëòa-sa-roma-küpaù 
ädhära-çaktim avalambya paräà sva-mürtià 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi


===== PAGE 83 / 131 =====

77
yasyaika-niçvasita-kälam athävalambya 
jévanti loma-vilajä jagad-aëòa-näthäù 
viñëur mahän sa iha yasya kalä-viçeño 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
bhäsvän yathäçma-çakaleñu nijeñu tejaù 
svéyaà kiyat prakaöayaty api tadvad atra 
brahmä ya eña jagad-aëòa-vidhäna-kartä 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yat-päda-pallava-yugaà vinidhäya kumbha- 
dvandve praëäma-samaye sa gaëädhiräjaù 
vighnän vihantum alam asya jagat-trayasya 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
agnir mahé gaganam ambu marud diçaç ca 
kälas tathätma-manaséti jagat-trayäëi 
yasmäd bhavanti vibhavanti viçanti yaà ca 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yac-cakñur eña savitä sakala-grahäëäà 
räjä samasta-sura-mürtir açeña-tejäù 
yasyäjïayä bhramati sambhåta-käla-cakro 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
dharmo ‘tha päpa-nicayaù çrutayas tapäàsi 
brahmädi-kéöa-patagävadhayaç ca jéväù 
yad-datta-mätra-vibhava-prakaöa-prabhävä 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva-karma- 
bandhänurüpa-phala-bhäjanam ätanoti 
karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhäjäà 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi


===== PAGE 84 / 131 =====

78
yaà krodha-käma-sahaja-praëayädi-bhéti- 
vätsalya-moha-guru-gaurava-sevya-bhävaiù 
saïcintya tasya sadåçéà tanum äpur ete 
govindam ädi-puruñaà tam ahaà bhajämi
çriyaù käntäù käntaù parama-puruñaù kalpa-taravo 
drumä bhümiç cintämaëi-gaëa-mayé toyam amåtam 
kathä gänaà näöyaà gamanam api vaàçé priya-sakhé 
cid-änandaà jyotiù param api tad äsvädyam api ca
sa yatra kñéräbdhiù sravati surabhébhyaç ca su-mahän 
nimeñärdhäkhyo vä vrajati na hi yaträpi samayaù 
bhaje çvetadvépaà tam aham iha golokam iti yaà 
vidantas te santaù kñiti-virala-cäräù katipaye


===== PAGE 85 / 131 =====

79
Çrématé Kuntédevé’s Prayers
kunty uväca
namasye puruñaà tvädyam 
éçvaraà prakåteù param 
alakñyaà sarva-bhütänäm 
antar bahir avasthitam
Çrématé Kunté said: O Kåñëa, I offer my obeisances unto You 
because You are the original personality of God and are unaffected by 
the qualities of the material world. You are existing both within and 
without everything, yet You are invisible to all.
mäyä-javanikäcchannam 
ajïädhokñajam avyayam 
na lakñyase müòha-dåçä 
naöo näöyadharo yathä
Being beyond the range of limited sense perception, You are the 
eternally irreproachable factor covered by the curtain of deluding 
energy. You are invisible to the foolish observer, exactly as an actor 
dressed as a player is not recognized.
tathä paramahaàsänäà 
munénäm amalätmanäm 
bhakti-yoga-vidhänärthaà 
kathaà paçyema hi striyaù
You Yourself descend to propagate the transcendental science of 
devotional service unto the hearts of the advanced transcendentalists 
and mental speculators, who are purified by being able to discriminate 
between matter and spirit. How, then, can we women know You 
perfectly?


===== PAGE 86 / 131 =====

80
kåñëäya väsudeväya 
devaké-nandanäya ca 
nanda-gopa-kumäräya 
govindäya namo namaù
Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, 
who has become the son of Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devaké, the boy 
of Nanda and the other cowherd men of Våndävana, and the enlivener 
of the cows and the senses.
namaù paìkaja-näbhäya 
namaù paìkaja-mäline 
namaù paìkaja-neträya 
namas te paìkajäìghraye
My respectful obeisances are unto You, O Lord, whose abdomen is 
marked with a depression like a lotus flower, who are always decorated 
with garlands of lotus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus and 
whose feet are engraved with lotuses.
yathä håñékeça khalena devaké 
kaàsena ruddhäticiraà çucärpitä 
vimocitähaà ca sahätmajä vibho 
tvayaiva näthena muhur vipad-gaëät
O Håñékeça, master of the senses and Lord of lords, You have 
released Your mother, Devaké, who was long imprisoned and distressed 
by the envious King Kaàsa, and me and my children from a series of 
constant dangers.
viñän mahägneù puruñäda-darçanäd 
asat-sabhäyä vana-väsa-kåcchrataù 
mådhe mådhe ’neka-mahärathästrato 
drauëy-astrataç cäsma hare ’bhirakñitäù


===== PAGE 87 / 131 =====

81
My dear Kåñëa, Your Lordship has protected us from a poisoned 
cake, from a great fire, from cannibals, from the vicious assembly, 
from sufferings during our exile in the forest and from the battle 
where great generals fought. And now You have saved us from the 
weapon of Açvatthämä.
vipadaù santu täù çaçvat 
tatra tatra jagad-guro 
bhavato darçanaà yat syäd 
apunar bhava-darçanam
I wish that all those calamities would happen again and again so 
that we could see You again and again, for seeing You means that we 
will no longer see repeated births and deaths.
janmaiçvarya-çruta-çrébhir 
edhamäna-madaù pumän 
naivärhaty abhidhätuà vai 
tväm akiïcana-gocaram
My Lord, Your Lordship can easily be approached, but only 
by those who are materially exhausted. One who is on the path 
of [material] progress, trying to improve himself with respectable 
parentage, great opulence, high education and bodily beauty, cannot 
approach You with sincere feeling.
namo ’kiïcana-vittäya 
nivåtta-guëa-våttaye 
ätmärämäya çäntäya 
kaivalya-pataye namaù
My obeisances are unto You, who are the property of the materially 
impoverished. You have nothing to do with the actions and reactions 
of the material modes of nature. You are self-satisfied, and therefore 
You are the most gentle and are master of the monists.


===== PAGE 88 / 131 =====

82
manye tväà kälam éçänam 
anädi-nidhanaà vibhum 
samaà carantaà sarvatra 
bhütänäà yan mithaù kaliù
My Lord, I consider Your Lordship to be eternal time, the supreme 
controller, without beginning and end, the all-pervasive one. In 
distributing Your mercy, You are equal to everyone. The dissensions 
between living beings are due to social intercourse.
na veda kaçcid bhagavaàç cikérñitaà 
tavehamänasya nåëäà viòambanam 
na yasya kaçcid dayito ’sti karhicid 
dveñyaç ca yasmin viñamä matir nåëäm
O Lord, no one can understand Your transcendental pastimes, 
which appear to be human and are so misleading. You have no specific 
object of favor, nor do You have any object of envy. People only 
imagine that You are partial.
janma karma ca viçvätmann 
ajasyäkartur ätmanaù 
tiryaì-nèñiñu yädaùsu 
tad atyanta-viòambanam
Of course it is bewildering, O soul of the universe, that You work, 
though You are inactive, and that You take birth, though You are the 
vital force and the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst animals, 
men, sages and aquatics. Verily, this is bewildering.
gopy ädade tvayi kåtägasi däma tävad 
yä te daçäçru-kaliläïjana-sambhramäkñam 
vaktraà ninéya bhaya-bhävanayä sthitasya 
sä mäà vimohayati bhér api yad bibheti


===== PAGE 89 / 131 =====

83
My dear Kåñëa, Yaçodä took up a rope to bind You when You 
committed an offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded with 
tears, which washed the mascara from Your eyes. And You were afraid, 
though fear personified is afraid of You. This sight is bewildering to 
me.
kecid ähur ajaà jätaà 
puëya-çlokasya kértaye 
yadoù priyasyänvaväye 
malayasyeva candanam
Some say that the unborn is born for the glorification of pious 
kings, and others say that He is born to please King Yadu, one of Your 
dearest devotees. You appear in his family as sandalwood appears in 
the Malaya hills.
apare vasudevasya 
devakyäà yäcito ’bhyagät 
ajas tvam asya kñemäya 
vadhäya ca sura-dviñäm
Others say that since both Vasudeva and Devaké prayed for You, 
You have taken Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are unborn, 
yet You take Your birth for their welfare and to kill those who are 
envious of the demigods.
bhärävatäraëäyänye 
bhuvo näva ivodadhau 
sédantyä bhüri-bhäreëa 
jäto hy ätma-bhuvärthitaù
Others say that the world, being overburdened like a boat at sea, 
is much aggrieved, and that Brahmä, who is Your son, prayed for You, 
and so You have appeared to diminish the trouble.


===== PAGE 90 / 131 =====

84
bhave ’smin kliçyamänänäm 
avidyä-käma-karmabhiù 
çravaëa-smaraëärhäëi 
kariñyann iti kecana
And yet others say that You appeared to rejuvenate the devotional 
service of hearing, remembering, worshiping and so on in order that the 
conditioned souls suffering from material pangs might take advantage 
and gain liberation.
çåëvanti gäyanti gåëanty abhékñëaçaù 
smaranti nandanti tavehitaà janäù 
ta eva paçyanty acireëa tävakaà 
bhava-pravähoparamaà padämbujam
O Kåñëa, those who continuously hear, chant and repeat Your 
transcendental activities, or take pleasure in others’ doing so, certainly 
see Your lotus feet, which alone can stop the repetition of birth and 
death.
apy adya nas tvaà sva-kåtehita prabho 
jihäsasi svit suhådo ’nujévinaù 
yeñäà na cänyad bhavataù padämbujät 
paräyaëaà räjasu yojitäàhasäm
O my Lord, You have executed all duties Yourself. Are You leaving 
us today, though we are completely dependent on Your mercy and have 
no one else to protect us, now when all kings are at enmity with us?
ke vayaà näma-rüpäbhyäà 
yadubhiù saha päëòaväù 
bhavato ’darçanaà yarhi 
håñékäëäm iveçituù


===== PAGE 91 / 131 =====

85
As the name and fame of a particular body is finished with the 
disappearance of the living spirit, similarly if You do not look upon 
us, all our fame and activities, along with the Päëòavas and Yadus, 
will end at once.
neyaà çobhiñyate tatra 
yathedänéà gadädhara 
tvat-padair aìkitä bhäti 
sva-lakñaëa-vilakñitaiù
O Gadädhara [Kåñëa], our kingdom is now being marked by the 
impressions of Your feet, and therefore it appears beautiful. But when 
You leave, it will no longer be so.
ime jana-padäù svåddhäù 
supakvauñadhi-vérudhaù 
vanädri-nady-udanvanto 
hy edhante tava vékñitaiù
All these cities and villages are flourishing in all respects because 
the herbs and grains are in abundance, the trees are full of fruits, the 
rivers are flowing, the hills are full of minerals and the oceans full of 
wealth. And this is all due to Your glancing over them.
atha viçveça viçvätman 
viçva-mürte svakeñu me 
sneha-päçam imaà chindhi 
dåòhaà päëòuñu våñëiñu
O Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O personality of the 
form of the universe, please, therefore, sever my tie of affection for 
my kinsmen, the Päëòavas and the Våñëis.


===== PAGE 92 / 131 =====

86
tvayi me ’nanya-viñayä 
matir madhu-pate ’sakåt 
ratim udvahatäd addhä 
gaìgevaugham udanvati
O Lord of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the sea without 
hindrance, let my attraction be constantly drawn unto You without 
being diverted to anyone else.
çré-kåñëa kåñëa-sakha våñëy-åñabhävani-dhrug- 
räjanya-vaàça-dahanänapavarga-vérya 
govinda go-dvija-surärti-harävatära 
yogeçvaräkhila-guro bhagavan namas te
O Kåñëa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief amongst the descendants 
of Våñëi, You are the destroyer of those political parties which are 
disturbing elements on this earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. 
You are the proprietor of the transcendental abode, and You descend 
to relieve the distresses of the cows, the brähmaëas and the devotees. 
You possess all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of the entire 
universe. You are the almighty God, and I offer You my respectful 
obeisances.


===== PAGE 93 / 131 =====

87
Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé’s Prayers
çré-çuka uväca 
namaù parasmai puruñäya bhüyase 
sad-udbhava-sthäna-nirodha-lélayä 
gåhéta-çakti-tritayäya dehinäm 
antarbhaväyänupalakñya-vartmane
Çukadeva Gosvämé said: Let me offer my respectful obeisances 
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead who, for the creation of 
the material world, accepts the three modes of nature. He is the 
complete whole residing within the body of everyone, and His ways 
are inconceivable.
bhüyo namaù sad-våjina-cchide ’satäm 
asambhaväyäkhila-sattva-mürtaye 
puàsäà punaù päramahaàsya äçrame 
vyavasthitänäm anumågya-däçuñe
I again offer my respectful obeisances unto the form of complete 
existence and transcendence, who is the liberator of the pious devotees 
from all distresses and the destroyer of the further advances in atheistic 
temperament of the nondevotee-demons. For the transcendentalists 
who are situated in the topmost spiritual perfection, He grants their 
specific destinations.
namo namas te ’stv åñabhäya sätvatäà 
vidüra-käñöhäya muhuù kuyoginäm 
nirasta-sämyätiçayena rädhasä 
sva-dhämani brahmaëi raàsyate namaù
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto He who is the associate 
of the members of the Yadu dynasty and who is always a problem for 


===== PAGE 94 / 131 =====

88
the nondevotees. He is the supreme enjoyer of both the material and 
spiritual worlds, yet He enjoys His own abode in the spiritual sky. 
There is no one equal to Him because His transcendental opulence 
is immeasurable.
yat-kértanaà yat-smaraëaà yad-ékñaëaà 
yad-vandanaà yac-chravaëaà yad-arhaëam 
lokasya sadyo vidhunoti kalmañaà 
tasmai subhadra-çravase namo namaù
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-auspicious 
Lord Çré Kåñëa, about whom glorification, remembrances, audience, 
prayers, hearing and worship can at once cleanse the effects of all sins 
of the performer.
vicakñaëä yac-caraëopasädanät 
saìgaà vyudasyobhayato ’ntar-ätmanaù 
vindanti hi brahma-gatià gata-klamäs 
tasmai subhadra-çravase namo namaù
Let me offer my respectful obeisances again and again unto the 
all-auspicious Lord Çré Kåñëa. The highly intellectual, simply by 
surrendering unto His lotus feet, are relieved of all attachments to 
present and future existences and without difficulty progress toward 
spiritual existence.
tapasvino däna-parä yaçasvino 
manasvino mantra-vidaù sumaìgaläù 
kñemaà na vindanti vinä yad-arpaëaà 
tasmai subhadra-çravase namo namaù
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the all-auspicious 
Lord Çré Kåñëa again and again because the great learned sages, the 


===== PAGE 95 / 131 =====

89
great performers of charity, the great workers of distinction, the great 
philosophers and mystics, the great chanters of the Vedic hymns and 
the great followers of Vedic principles cannot achieve any fruitful result 
without dedication of such great qualities to the service of the Lord.
kiräta-hüëändhra-pulinda-pulkaçä 
äbhéra-çumbhä yavanäù khasädayaù 
ye ’nye ca päpä yad-apäçrayäçrayäù 
çudhyanti tasmai prabhaviñëave namaù
Kiräta, Hüëa, Ändhra, Pulinda, Pulkaça, Äbhéra, Çumbha, Yavana, 
members of the Khasa races and even others addicted to sinful acts 
can be purified by taking shelter of the devotees of the Lord, due to 
His being the supreme power. I beg to offer my respectful obeisances 
unto Him.
sa eña ätmätmavatäm adhéçvaras 
trayémayo dharmamayas tapomayaù 
gata-vyalékair aja-çaìkarädibhir 
vitarkya-liìgo bhagavän prasédatäm
He is the Supersoul and the Supreme Lord of all self-realized 
souls. He is the personification of the Vedas, religious scriptures and 
austerities. He is worshiped by Lord Brahmä and Çiva and all those 
who are transcendental to all pretensions. Being so revered with awe 
and veneration, may that Supreme Absolute be pleased with me.
çriyaù patir yajïa-patiù prajä-patir 
dhiyäà patir loka-patir dharä-patiù 
patir gatiç cändhaka-våñëi-sätvatäà 
prasédatäà me bhagavän satäà patiù
May Lord Çré Kåñëa, who is the worshipable Lord of all devotees, 


===== PAGE 96 / 131 =====

90
the protector and glory of all the kings like Andhaka and Våñëi of the 
Yadu dynasty, the husband of all goddesses of fortune, the director of 
all sacrifices and therefore the leader of all living entities, the controller 
of all intelligence, the proprietor of all planets, spiritual and material, 
and the supreme incarnation on the earth (the supreme all in all), be 
merciful upon me.
yad-aìghry-abhidhyäna-samädhi-dhautayä 
dhiyänupaçyanti hi tattvam ätmanaù 
vadanti caitat kavayo yathä-rucaà 
sa me mukundo bhagavän prasédatäm
It is the Personality of Godhead Çré Kåñëa who gives liberation. By 
thinking of His lotus feet at every second, following in the footsteps 
of authorities, the devotee in trance can see the Absolute Truth. The 
learned mental speculators, however, think of Him according to their 
whims. May the Lord be pleased with me.
pracoditä yena purä sarasvaté 
vitanvatäjasya satéà småtià hådi 
sva-lakñaëä prädurabhüt kiläsyataù 
sa me åñéëäm åñabhaù prasédatäm
May the Lord, who in the beginning of the creation amplified the 
potent knowledge of Brahmä from within his heart and inspired him 
with full knowledge of creation and of His own Self, and who appeared 
to be generated from the mouth of Brahmä, be pleased with me.
bhütair mahadbhir ya imäù puro vibhur 
nirmäya çete yad amüñu püruñaù 
bhuìkte guëän ñoòaça ñoòaçätmakaù 
so ’laìkåñéñöa bhagavän vacäàsi me
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who enlivens the 


===== PAGE 97 / 131 =====

91
materially created bodies of the elements by lying down within the 
universe, and who in His puruña incarnation causes the living being 
to be subjected to the sixteen divisions of material modes which are 
his generator, be pleased to decorate my statements.
namas tasmai bhagavate 
väsudeväya vedhase 
papur jïänam ayaà saumyä 
yan-mukhämburuhäsavam
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Çréla Vyäsadeva, the 
incarnation of Väsudeva who compiled the Vedic scriptures. The pure 
devotees drink up the nectarean transcendental knowledge dropping 
from the lotuslike mouth of the Lord.


===== PAGE 98 / 131 =====

92
Dhruva Mahäräja’s Prayers
dhruva uväca 
yo ’ntaù praviçya mama väcam imäà prasuptäà 
saïjévayaty akhila-çakti-dharaù sva-dhämnä 
anyäàç ca hasta-caraëa-çravaëa-tvag-ädén 
präëän namo bhagavate puruñäya tubhyam
Dhruva Mahäräja said: My dear Lord, You are all-powerful. After 
entering within me, You have enlivened all my sleeping senses—my 
hands, legs, ears, touch sensation, life force and especially my power 
of speech. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
ekas tvam eva bhagavann idam ätma-çaktyä 
mäyäkhyayoru-guëayä mahad-ädy-açeñam 
såñövänuviçya puruñas tad-asad-guëeñu 
näneva däruñu vibhävasuvad vibhäsi
My Lord, You are the supreme one, but by Your different energies 
You appear differently in the spiritual and material worlds. You create 
the total energy of the material world by Your external potency, and 
after creation You enter within the material world as the Supersoul. You 
are the Supreme Person, and through the temporary modes of material 
nature You create varieties of manifestation, just as fire, entering into 
wood of different shapes, burns brilliantly in different varieties.
tvad-dattayä vayunayedam acañöa viçvaà 
supta-prabuddha iva nätha bhavat-prapannaù 
tasyäpavargya-çaraëaà tava päda-mülaà 
vismaryate kåta-vidä katham ärta-bandho
O my master, Lord Brahmä is fully surrendered unto You. In 
the beginning You gave him knowledge, and thus he could see and 


===== PAGE 99 / 131 =====

93
understand the entire universe, just as a person awakens from sleep 
and visualizes his immediate duties. You are the only shelter of all 
persons who desire liberation, and You are the friend of all who are 
distressed. How, therefore, can a learned person who has perfect 
knowledge ever forget You?
nünaà vimuñöa-matayas tava mäyayä te 
ye tväà bhaväpyaya-vimokñaëam anya-hetoù 
arcanti kalpaka-taruà kuëapopabhogyam 
icchanti yat sparçajaà niraye ’pi nèëäm
Persons who worship You simply for the sense gratification of this 
bag of skin are certainly influenced by Your illusory energy. In spite of 
having You, who are like a desire tree and are the cause of liberation 
from birth and death, foolish persons, such as me, desire benedictions 
from You for sense gratification, which is available even for those who 
live in hellish conditions.
yä nirvåtis tanu-bhåtäà tava päda-padma- 
dhyänäd bhavaj-jana-kathä-çravaëena vä syät 
sä brahmaëi sva-mahimany api nätha mä bhüt 
kià tv antakäsi-lulität patatäà vimänät
My Lord, the transcendental bliss derived from meditating upon 
Your lotus feet or hearing about Your glories from pure devotees is 
so unlimited that it is far beyond the stage of brahmänanda, wherein 
one thinks himself merged in the impersonal Brahman as one with the 
Supreme. Since brahmänanda is also defeated by the transcendental 
bliss derived from devotional service, then what to speak of the 
temporary blissfulness of elevating oneself to the heavenly planets, 
which is ended by the separating sword of time? Although one may 
be elevated to the heavenly planets, he falls down in due course of 
time.


===== PAGE 100 / 131 =====

94
bhaktià muhuù pravahatäà tvayi me prasaìgo 
bhüyäd ananta mahatäm amaläçayänäm 
yenäïjasolbaëam uru-vyasanaà bhaväbdhià 
neñye bhavad-guëa-kathämåta-päna-mattaù
Dhruva Mahäräja continued: O unlimited Lord, kindly bless 
me so that I may associate with great devotees who engage in Your 
transcendental loving service constantly, as the waves of a river 
constantly flow. Such transcendental devotees are completely situated 
in an uncontaminated state of life. By the process of devotional service 
I shall surely be able to cross the nescient ocean of material existence, 
which is filled with the waves of blazing, firelike dangers. It will be very 
easy for me, for I am becoming mad to hear about Your transcendental 
qualities and pastimes, which are eternally existent.
te na smaranty atitaräà priyam éça martyaà 
ye cänv adaù suta-suhåd-gåha-vitta-däräù 
ye tv abja-näbha bhavadéya-padäravinda- 
saugandhya-lubdha-hådayeñu kåta-prasaìgäù
O Lord who have a lotus navel, if a person happens to associate 
with a devotee whose heart always hankers after Your lotus feet, 
seeking always their fragrance, he is never attached to the material 
body or, in a bodily relationship, to offspring, friends, home, wealth 
and wife, which are very, very dear to materialistic persons. Indeed, 
he does not care for them.
tiryaì-naga-dvija-sarésåpa-deva-daitya- 
martyädibhiù paricitaà sad-asad-viçeñam 
rüpaà sthaviñöham aja te mahad-ädy-anekaà 
nätaù paraà parama vedmi na yatra vädaù


===== PAGE 101 / 131 =====

95
My dear Lord, O Supreme Unborn, I know that the different 
varieties of living entities, such as animals, trees, birds, reptiles, 
demigods and human beings, are spread throughout the universe, 
which is caused by the total material energy, and I know that they 
are sometimes manifest and sometimes unmanifest; but I have never 
experienced the supreme form I behold as I see You now. Now all 
kinds of methods of theorizing have come to an end.
kalpänta etad akhilaà jaöhareëa gåhëan 
çete pumän sva-dåg ananta-sakhas tad-aìke 
yan-näbhi-sindhu-ruha-käïcana-loka-padma- 
garbhe dyumän bhagavate praëato ’smi tasmai
My dear Lord, at the end of each millennium the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu dissolves everything 
manifested within the universe into His belly. He lies down on the 
lap of Çeña Näga, from His navel sprouts a golden lotus flower on a 
stem, and on that lotus Lord Brahmä is created. I can understand that 
You are the same Supreme Godhead. I therefore offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You.
tvaà nitya-mukta-pariçuddha-vibuddha ätmä 
küöa-stha ädi-puruño bhagaväàs try-adhéçaù 
yad-buddhy-avasthitim akhaëòitayä sva-dåñöyä 
drañöä sthitäv adhimakho vyatirikta ässe
My Lord, by Your unbroken transcendental glance You are 
the supreme witness of all stages of intellectual activities. You are 
eternally liberated, Your existence is situated in pure goodness, and 
You are existent in the Supersoul without change. You are the original 
Personality of Godhead, full with six opulences, and You are eternally 
the master of the three modes of material nature. Thus, You are always 


===== PAGE 102 / 131 =====

96
different from the ordinary living entities. As Lord Viñëu, You maintain 
all the affairs of the entire universe, and yet You stand aloof and are 
the enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices.
yasmin viruddha-gatayo hy aniçaà patanti 
vidyädayo vividha-çaktaya änupürvyät 
tad brahma viçva-bhavam ekam anantam ädyam 
änanda-mätram avikäram ahaà prapadye
My dear Lord, in Your impersonal manifestation of Brahman there 
are always two opposing elements—knowledge and ignorance. Your 
multienergies are continually manifest, but the impersonal Brahman, 
which is undivided, original, changeless, unlimited and blissful, is 
the cause of the material manifestation. Because You are the same 
impersonal Brahman, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
satyäçiño hi bhagavaàs tava päda-padmam 
äçés tathänubhajataù puruñärtha-mürteù 
apy evam arya bhagavän paripäti dénän 
väçreva vatsakam anugraha-kätaro ’smän
My Lord, O Supreme Lord, You are the supreme personified form 
of all benediction. Therefore, for one who abides in Your devotional 
service with no other desire, worshiping Your lotus feet is better than 
becoming king and lording it over a kingdom. That is the benediction 
of worshiping Your lotus feet. To ignorant devotees like me, You are 
the causelessly merciful maintainer, just like a cow, who takes care 
of the newly born calf by supplying milk and giving it protection 
from attack.
sthänäbhiläñé tapasi sthito ’haà 
tväà präptavän deva-munéndra-guhyam 
käcaà vicinvann api divya-ratnaà 
svämin kåtärtho ’smi varaà na yäce


===== PAGE 103 / 131 =====

97
“[When he was being blessed by the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Dhruva Mahäräja said:] ‘O my Lord, because I was seeking 
an opulent material position, I was performing severe types of penance 
and austerity. Now I have gotten You, who are very difficult for the 
great demigods, saintly persons and kings to attain. I was searching 
after a piece of glass, but instead I have found a most valuable jewel. 
Therefore I am so satisfied that I do not wish to ask any benediction 
from You.’  (From Hari-bhakti-viläsa)


===== PAGE 104 / 131 =====

98
Çré Çré Çikñäñöakam
1.
ceto-darpaëa-märjanaà bhava-mahädävägni-nirväpaëaà
çreyaù kairava-candrikävitaraëaà vidyävadhüjévanam
änandämbudhi-vardhanaà pratipadaà pürëämåtäsvädanaà
sarvätma-snapanaà paraà vijayate çré-krñëa-saìkértanam
Glory to the Çré Kåñëa saìkértana, which cleanses the heart of all 
the dust accumulated for years and extinguishes the fire of conditional 
life, of repeated birth and death. This saìkértana movement is the 
prime benediction for humanity at large because it spreads the rays of 
the benediction moon. It is the life of all transcendental knowledge. It 
increases the ocean of transcendental bliss, and it enables us to fully 
taste the nectar for which we are always anxious.
2.
nämnämakäri bahudhä nija-sarva-çaktis
taträrpitä niyamitaù smaraëe na kälaù
etädåçé tava kåpä bhagavan mamäpi
durdaivamédåçamihäjani nänurägaù
O my Lord, Your holy name alone can render all benediction to 
living beings, and thus You have hundreds and millions of names like 
Kåñëa and Govinda. In these transcendental names You have invested 
all Your transcendental energies, and there are no hard and fast rules 
for chanting these names. O my Lord, out of kindness You enable 
us to easily approach You by chanting Your holy names, but I am so 
unfortunate that I have no attraction for them.


===== PAGE 105 / 131 =====

99
3.
tåëädapi sunécena
taror api sahiñëunä
amäninä mänadena
kértanéyaù sadä hariù
One should chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble state of 
mind, thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street; one should 
be more tolerant than a tree, devoid of all sense of false prestige and 
should be ready to offer all respect to others. In such a state of mind 
one can chant the holy name of the Lord constantly.
4.
na dhanaà na janaà na sundaréà
kavitäà vä jagadéça kämaye
mama janmani janmanéçvare
bhavatädbhaktir ahaitaké tvayi
O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor 
do I desire to enjoy beautiful women, nor do I want any number of 
followers. I only want Your causeless devotional service in my life 
birth after birth.
5.
ayi nandatanuja kiìkaraà
patitaà mäà viñame bhavämbudhau
kåpayä tava päda-paìkaja-
sthita-dhülésadåçaà vicintaya
O son of Mahäräja Nanda [Kåñëa], I am Your eternal servitor, 
yet somehow or other I have fallen into the ocean of birth and death. 
Please pick me up from this ocean of death and place me as one of 
the atoms of Your lotus feet.


===== PAGE 106 / 131 =====

100
6.
nayanaà galadaçrudhärayä
vadanaà gadgadaruddhayä girä
pulakair nicitaà vapuù kadä
tava nämagrahaëe bhaviñyati
O my Lord, when will my eyes be decorated with tears of love 
flowing constantly when I chant Your holy name? When will my 
voice choke up, and when will the hairs of my body stand on end at 
the recitation of Your name?
7.
yugäyitaà nimeñeëa
cakñuñä prävåñäyitam
çünyäyitaà jagat-sarvaà
govinda-viraheëa me
O Govinda! Feeling Your separation, I am considering a moment 
to be like twelve years or more. Tears are flowing from my eyes like 
torrents of rain, and I am feeling all vacant in the world in Your 
absence.
8.
äçliñya vä pädaratäà pinañöu mäm
adarçanänmarmahatäà karotu vä
yathä tathä vä vidadhätu lampaöo
mat-präëa-näthas tu sa eva näparaù
I know no one but Kåñëa as my Lord, and He shall remain so even if 
He handles me roughly in His embrace or makes me brokenhearted by 
not being present before me. He is completely free to do anything and 
everything, for He is always my worshipful Lord unconditionally.


===== PAGE 107 / 131 =====

101
Çré Veìkaöeça Suprabhätam
kausalyäsuprajäräma! 
pürvä sandhyä pravartate, 
uttiñöha naraçärdüla! 
kartavyaà daivam ähnikam (1)
O Räma, Kausalya’s auspicious child! Twilight is appearing in the 
East. O best of men (i.e., Puruñottama)! Wake up, the divine daily-
rituals have to be performed.
uttiñöhottiñöha govinda! 
uttiñöha garuòadhvaja! 
uttiñöha kamaläkänta! 
trailokyaà maìgalaà kuru (2)
O Govinda, wake up! O Garuòadhvaja (i.e., one who has Garuòa on 
the banner)! Wake up. O Kamaläkänta ! (i.e., the husband of Kamalä) 
(rising) render the three worlds auspicious.
mätas samasta-jagatäà madhukaiöabhäreù 
vakñovihäriëi! manohara-divyamürte! 
çrésvämini çritajanapriya-dänaçéle! 
çré-veìkaöeça-dayite! tava suprabhätam (3)
May it be an auspicious dawn (morning) to Thee, O Lakñmé, the 
Mother of the Worlds, the ever-dweller on the chest of Viñëu (i.e., the 
enemy of the demons, Madhu and Kaiöabha), of attractive and divine 
form, the Mistress, and of the nature of granting the desired objects 
of those seeking refuge!
tava suprabhätam aravindalocane! 
bhavatu prasannamukha-candramaëòale! 


===== PAGE 108 / 131 =====

102
vidhiçaìkarendra-vanitäbhir arcite 
våñaçailanätha-dayite dayänidhe! (4)
May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee, O Lakñmé (i.e., the beloved 
of the Lord of Våñäcala) of eyes like the lotus (petals), (Lakñmé) of a 
bright face like (the orbit of) the Moon, (Lakñmé) worshipped by the 
wives of Brahmä, Çaìkara and Indra (i.e., Väëé, Girijä and Pulomajä) 
and (Lakñmé who is) a treasure of compassion.
atryädi-saptaåñayas samupäsya sandhyäm 
äkäçasindhu-kamaläni manoharäëi 
ädäya pädayugam arcayituà prapannäù 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (5)
Having worshipped the morning twilight (i.e., having said the 
morning prayer, namely, the sandhyävandana) the seven sages like 
Atri, bringing the beautiful lotuses from the Divine Ganges, have 
arrived to worship Thy feet. Lord of Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious 
dawn to Thee.
païcänanäbjabhava-ñaëmukha-väsavädyäù 
traivikramädi-caritaà vibudhäù stuvanti 
bhäñäpatiù paöhati väsaraçuddhim ärät 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (6)
The Gods Içvara (the five-faced), Brahmä  (the lotus born), 
Subrahmaëya (the six-faced), Indra and others are praising stories 
(deeds) of Your incarnations as the Trivikramävatära. Near by is 
Båhaspati reading out the planetary position (i.e., Païcäìgam) of the 
day. Lord Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
éñatpraphulla-saraséruha-närikela- 
pügadrumädi-sumanohara-pälikänäm 


===== PAGE 109 / 131 =====

103
äväti mandam anilaù saha divyagandhaiù 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (7)
The breeze, carrying the wonderful fragrance of the partly opened 
lotuses and the beautiful ears of the tree like the Areca and Coconut, 
is gently blowing. Lord of Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to 
Thee.
unmélya netrayugam uttama-païjarasthäù 
päträvaçiñöa-kadaléphala-päyasäni! 
bhuktvä salélam atha keliçukäù paöhanti 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (8)
The parrots, kept for pleasure in the foremost cages opening their 
eyes, are graciously singing, after eating the remains of the plantain 
fruits and the päyasam in the vessels. Lord Çeñäcala! May it be an 
auspicious dawn to Thee.
tantréprakarña-madhurasvanayä vipaïcyä 
gäyaty anantacaritaà tava närado ’pi 
bhäñäsamagram asakåt-karacäraramyaà 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (9)
	
(The sage) Närada, with (his) Véëä of sweet music produced by 
the tight-grip of the strings, is singing in praise of Thy endless deeds, 
expressed in fine language, by beautifully waving the hand often. Lord 
of Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
bhåìgävalé ca makaranda-rasänuviddha- 
jhaìkäragéta-ninadaiù saha sevanäya, 
niryäty upänta-sarasé-kamalodarebhyaù 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (10)
The swarm of bees, making humming sounds, while sucking 
honey, is emerging from the interiors of the lotuses of the adjoining 


===== PAGE 110 / 131 =====

104
pools in order to serve Thee. Lord of Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious 
dawn to Thee.
yoñä-gaëena vara-dadhni vimathyamäne 
ghoñälayeñu dadhimanthana-tévraghoñäù 
roñät kalià vidadhate kakubhaç ca kumbhäù 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (11)
While the womenfolk in the hamlet of cowherds churn the fine 
curds, the high sounds emanating from the pots and their echoes, make 
the appearance as if the pots and the (eight) directions are engaged in 
quarrels. Lord of Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
padmeça-mitra-çatapatra-gatälivargäù 
hartuà çriyaà kuvalayasya nijäìga-lakñmyä 
bheré-ninädam iva bibhrati tévra-nädaà 
çeñädri-çekhara-vibho! tava suprabhätam (12)
The swarms of bees in the lotuses which are the friends of the 
Sun, are making violent sounds as if producing the kettledrum sound 
with a view to robbing (surpassing) the splendour of the blue lotuses 
with their (bodily) lustre. Lord of Çeñäcala! May it be an auspicious 
dawn to Thee.
çrémann abhéñöa-varadäkhila-lokabandho! 
çré-çréniväsa! jagadeka-dayaikasindho 
çrédevatä-gåha-bhujäntara-divyamürte! 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (13)
One with Lakñmé! Giver of the desired objects (boons)! Relative 
(friend) of all the worlds! Abode of Çré (Lakñmé)! The matchless ocean 
of compassion! One having a form charming on account of the chest 
which is the abode of Çré (Lakñmé)! Lord of Veìkäöäcala! May it be an 
auspicious dawn to Thee.


===== PAGE 111 / 131 =====

105
çrésvämi-puñkariëikä-plava-nirmaläìgäù 
çreyo ’rthino hara-viriïci-sanandanädyäù 
dväre vasanti varavetra-hatottamäìgäù 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (14)
Brahmä, Maheçvara, the sage Sanandana and others, aspiring well-
being and having bathed in the Çrésvämipuñkariëé and (thus) sanctified 
their bodies, are waiting at the entrance receiving cane-strokes on their 
heads. Lord of Veìkäöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
çré-çeñaçaila-garuòäcala-veìkaöädri- 
näräyaëädri-våñabhädri-våñädri-mukhyäm 
äkhyäà tvadéya-vasater aniçaà vadanti 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (15)
Lord of Veìkaöäcala! Thy abode is always called by several names, 
Çré Çeñaçaila, Garuòäcala, Veìkaöädri, Näräyaëädri, Våñabhädri and 
Våñädri. May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
seväparäù çiva-sureça-kåçänu-dharma- 
rakñombunätha-pavamäna-dhanädhinäthäù 
baddhäïjali-pravilasan nijaçérña-deçäù 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (16)
Çiva, Indra, Agni, Yama, Nairuti, Varuëa, Väyu and Kubera, with 
folded hands on their heads, are desirous of offering service to Thee. 
Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
dhäöéñu te vihagaräja-mågädhiräja- 
nägädhiräja-gajaräja-hayädhiräjäù 
svasvädhikära-mahimädikam arthayante 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (17)
Thy conveyances - the Lord of Birds (i.e., Garuòa), Lord of Animals 
(i.e., Lion),  Lord of Serpents (i.e., Ädi Çeña), Lord of Elephants 
(Airävata) and Lord of Horses (i.e., Uccaiùçravä) - are begging (Thee 


===== PAGE 112 / 131 =====

106
to grant them) their respective authority, power etc., (to serve Thee 
better) in Your amusement strolls. Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May it be an 
auspicious dawn to Thee.
süryendu-bhauma-budha-väkpati-kävya-sauri- 
svarbhänu-ketu-diviñat-pariñat-pradhänäù 
tvaddäsa-däsa-caramävadhi-däsadäsäù 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (18)
The main (deities) of the Assembly of Gods - the (nine-planets) 
Sun, Moon, Mars (Aìgäraka), Mercury (Budha), Jupiter (Båhaspati), 
Venus (Çukra), Saturn (Çani), Rähu and Ketu - remain (happy) to 
be the servants (i.e., they remain most obedient to Thee). Lord of 
Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
tvat-pädadhüli-bharita-sphuritottamängäù 
svargäpavarga-nirapekña-nijäntaraìgäù 
kalpägamäkalanayäkulatäà labhante 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (19)
Lord of Veìkaöäcala! (Thy servants of devotees), with their heads 
rendered lustrous (i.e., sanctified) by the dust of Thy feet, do not 
desire (being in Thy presence) even the Heaven or Liberation and are 
worried that another Kalpa will start (when there will be no such glory 
to Veìkaöäcala). May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
tvad-gopurägra-çikharäëi nirékñamäëäù 
svargäpavarga-padavéà paramäà çrayantaù 
martyä manuñya-bhuvane matim äçrayante 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (20)
Seeing the crests of Thy temple-tower, the mortals, while attaining 
the exalted paths of Heaven and Liberation, like to live on in the mortal 


===== PAGE 113 / 131 =====

107
world (as it gives them the opportunity of worshipping Thee). Lord 
of Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
çré-bhümi-näyaka! dayädi-guëämåtäbdhe! 
devädhideva! jagadeka-çaraëyamürte! 
çrémann-ananta-garuòädibhir arcitänghre! 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (21)
Lord of Çrédevé and Bhüdevé! The ocean of nectar of compassion 
and other virtues! The chief of Gods! The sole refuge of the Universe! 
The possessor of Çré (i.e., wealth)! One whose feet are worshipped 
by Ananta and Garuòa! Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious 
dawn to Thee.
çré-padmanäbha! puruñottama! väsudeva! 
vaikuëöha mädhava janärdana cakrapäëe 
çrévatsa-cihna çaraëägata-pärijäta 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam  (22)
Padmanäbha! Puruñottama! Väsudeva! Vaikuëöha! Mädhava! 
Janärdana! Cakrapäëi! Bearer of the mole Çré-vatsa! Celestial tree 
(pärijäta) to those who seek refuge! Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May it be 
an auspicious dawn to Thee.
kandarpa-darpa-hara-sundara-divyamürte 
käntä-kucämburuha-kuömala-loladåñöe 
kalyäëa-nirmala-guëäkara divyakérte 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (23)
Bearer of the charming and divine form surpassing the pride of 
the Cupid (Manmatha)! One whose sight is fondly centred on the 
lotus-bud-like breasts of His beloved! The abode of auspicious and 
pure virtues! The possessor of Divine fame! Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May 
it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.


===== PAGE 114 / 131 =====

108
ménäkåte kamaöha kola nåsiàha varëin 
svämin paraçvatha tapodhana rämacandra 
çeñäàçaräma yadunandana kalkirüpa 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (24)
Lord in (ten) incarnations of Matsya (Fish), Kamaöha (Tortoise), 
Kola (Divine Boar), Nåsiàha (Man-lion), Trivikrama (Dwarf), 
Paraçuräma, Räma, Balaräma, Kåñëa and Kalki! Lord of Veìkaöäcala! 
May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
elä-lavaìga-ghanasära-sugandhi-térthaà 
divyaà viyat-sariti hema-ghaöeñu pürëam 
dhåtvädya vaidika-çikhämaëayaù prahåñöäù 
tiñöhanti veìkaöapate! tava suprabhätam  (25)
The Brahmins, well-versed in the Vedas, are now joyfully waiting 
(for worshipping You), carrying the golden pots filled with the waters 
of the Divine Ganges (Äkäça Gaìgä) which (waters) are rendered 
fragrant by (mixing of) the cardamoms, cloves and camphor. Lord of 
Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
bhäsvän udeti vikacäni saroruhäëi 
saàpürayanti ninadaiù kakubho vihaìgäù 
çrévaiñëaväs satatam arthita-maìgaläs te 
dhämäçrayanti tava veìkaöa suprabhätam (26)
The sun is rising, the lotuses have blossomed. The birds are 
filling the directions (diks) with their noises. The Çré Vaiñëavas, 
always imploring auspiciousness, are waiting at Thy abode. Lord of 
Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
brahmädayas suravaräs samaharñayas te 
santas sanandana-mukhästv atha yogivaryäù 
dhämäntike tava hi maìgala-vastu-hastäù 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (27)


===== PAGE 115 / 131 =====

109
The Chief Gods like Brahmä, the great sages and the good Yogis 
as Sanandana are (waiting) at Thy abode, holding auspicious things 
in their hands. Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn 
to Thee.
lakñmé-niväsa niravadya-guëaika-sindho 
saàsära-sägara-samuttaraëaika-seto 
vedänta-vedya-nijavaibhava bhaktabhogya 
çré-veìkaöäcalapate! tava suprabhätam (28)
Abode of Lakñmé! Ocean of faultless (and auspicious) virtues! 
Bridge to cross the ocean of transmigration (saàsära)! One whose 
glory is known through the Upaniñads! One enjoyed by the devotees! 
Lord of Veìkaöäcala! May it be an auspicious dawn to Thee.
itthaà våñäcala-pateriha suprabhätaà 
ye mänaväù pratidinam paöhitum pravåttäù 
teñäà prabhäta-samaye småtiraìga-bhäjäà 
prajïäà parärtha-sulabhäà paramäà prasüte (29)
To the people who recite these Suprabhäta verses of Lord Veìkaöeça 
in this manner (with the understanding of the meaning) during the 
morning hour, to them the very thought of You grants the utmost 
intelligence and wisdom which finally lead them to realization of the 
highest.


===== PAGE 116 / 131 =====

110
Çré Veìkaöeça Stotram
kamalä-kuca-cücuka-kuìkumato 
niyatäruëitätula-nélatano 
kamaläyata-locana lokapate 
vijayé bhava veìkaöa-çailapate (1)
Lord of Veìkaöäcala! One whose matchless blue body is ever 
rendered red by the saffron on the teats of the breasts of Kamalä (i.e., 
Çrédevé)! One whose eyes are broad like the petals of the lotus! O Lord 
of the Universe! Victory to Thee, the Lord of Veìkaöäcala!
sacaturmukha-ñaëmukha-païcamukha- 
pramukhäkhila-daivata-maulimaëe 
çaraëägatavatsala säranidhe 
paripälaya mäà våña-çailapate (2)
The crest-jewel of all Gods like Brahmä, Kumärasvämé and 
Maheçvara! The compassionate to those seeking protection! Protect 
me,  O Lord of Våñaçaila!
ativelatayä tava durviñahair- 
anuvela-kåtair aparädha-çataiù 
bharitaà tvaritaà våña-çailapate 
parayä kåpayä paripähi hare (3)
Lord of Våñaçaila! May Thou (O Hari!), with extreme mercy, 
protect me who always committed various unendurable sins.
adhiveìkaöa-çailam udäramater- 
 janatäbhi-matädhika-dänaratät  
paradevatayä gaditän nigamaiù  
kamalädayitän na paraà kalaye  (4)


===== PAGE 117 / 131 =====

111
I do not consider supreme any one other than the Lord of Kamalä 
(Çrédevé), who is liberal-minded (and dwells) on Veìkaöäcala, who is 
intent on granting much more than what is desired by the devotees 
and who is described by the Vedas as the Supreme God.
kalaveëu-ravävaça-gopavadhü- 
çatakoöi-våtät smarakoöi samät 
prati-vallavikäbhimatät sukhadät  
vasudeva-sutän na paraà kalaye (5)
I do not understand any  one other than Kåñëa who is surrounded 
by innumerable cowherdesses (Gopikäs) enchanted by the sweet 
music of (His) flute, who is equal (in beauty) to myriads of Cupids 
(Manmathas), who gives joy and who is dear to each Gopikä.
abhiräma-guëäkara däçarathe  
jagadeka-dhanurdhara dhéramate  
raghunäyaka räma rameça vibho  
varado bhava deva dayä-jaladhe (6)
Source of enchanting virtues! Räma! The matchless archer of the 
Universe! The steady-minded! The best of the Raghu-race! Rameça! 
The all-pervading! The ocean of compassion! O Lord! Grant us 
boons.
avané-tanayä-kamanéya-karaà 
rajanékara-cäru-mukhämbu-ruham 
rajanécara-räja-tamo-mihiraà  
mahanéyam ahaà raghurämam aye (7)
I seek refuge of Raghuräma whose hand is desired by Sétä (or that 
does what Sétä likes), who has a beautiful face like the Moon, who is 
(like) the Sun (to put an end) to the darkness, ie., Rävaëa(the King 
of Demons) and who is exalted.


===== PAGE 118 / 131 =====

112
sumukhaà suhådaà sulabhaà sukhadaà 
 svanujaà ca sukäyam amoghaçaram  
apahäya raghüdvaham anyam ahaà 
na kathaïcana kaïcana jätu bhaje  (8)
At no time, and in no way, do I worship anyone barring Räma 
(who has elevated the Raghu race), who has a handsome face, is good-
hearted, easily attainable, has good brothers, has a beautiful body and 
whose arrows are unfailing.
vinä veìkaöeçaà na nätho na näthaù 
 sadä veìkaöeçaà smarämi smarämi  
hare veìkaöeça praséda praséda 
priyaà veìkaöeça prayaccha prayaccha (9)
There is no saviour other than Veìkaöeça. I ever pray to (or 
remember) Veìkaöeça. O Hari, Veìkaöeça! Be pleased; grant (us) 
favours.
ahaà düratas te padämbhoja-yugma- 
praëämecchayägatya seväà karomi 
sakåt sevayä nitya-seväphalaà tvaà 
prayaccha prayaccha prabho veìkaöeça (10)
O Lord! Having come from afar (with a desire to salute Thy 
lotus-like feet) I am serving Thee Veìkaöeça! (please) give me, for this 
occasional worship, the reward given to the regular (daily) worship.
ajïäninä mayä doñän 
açeñän vihitän hare 
kñamasva tvaà kñamasva tvaà 
çeñaçaila-çikhämaëe  (11)
O Hari! The crest-jewel of Çeñaçaila! Pardon me for all the sins 
committed by me, an ignorant.


===== PAGE 119 / 131 =====

113
 Çré Nåsiàha Kavacam
nåsiàha-kavacaà vakñye prahlädenoditaà purä 
sarva-rakñä-karaà puëyaà sarvopadrava-näçanam (1)
I shall now recite the Nåsiàha Kavaca, formerly spoken by Prahläda 
Mahäräja. It is the most pious, vanquishes all kinds of impediments, 
and provides one with all protection.
sarva-sampat-karaà caiva svarga-mokña-pradäyakam 
dhyätvä nåsiàhaà deveçaà hema-siàhäsana-sthitam (2)
It bestows upon one all opulences and can give one elevation to the 
heavenly planets or liberation. One should meditate on Lord Nåsiàha, 
Lord of the universe, seated upon a golden throne.
vivåtäsyaà tri-nayanaà çarad-indu-sama-prabham 
lakñmyäliìgita-vämäìgam vibhütibhir upäçritam (3)
His mouth is wide open, He has three eyes, and He is as radiant 
as the autumn moon. He holds the Goddess Lakñmé in an embrace 
on His left side, and is the resting place for all kinds of prosperity — 
material and spiritual.
catur-bhujaà komaläìgaà svarëa-kuëòala-çobhitam 
çriyä su-çobhitoraskaà ratna-keyüra-mudritam (4)
The Lord has four arms, and His limbs are very soft. He is decorated 
with golden earrings. His chest is glowing with Lakñmé & His arms 
are adorned with jewel studded ornaments.
tapta-käïcana-saìkäçaà péta-nirmala-väsasam 
indrädi-sura-maulisöha sphuran mäëikya-déptibhiù 
viräjita-pada-dvandvaà çaìkha-cakrädi-hetibhiù 
garutmatä ca vinayät stüyamänaà mudänvitam (5 & 6)


===== PAGE 120 / 131 =====

114
He is dressed in a  golden yellow garment, which looks like molten 
gold. His feet are very attractive by the rays emanating from the 
sparkling rubies on the crowns of Indra and other gods. He is armed 
with weapons like the Conch, the Discus (assuming forms). Garuòa 
joyfully offers prayers with great reverence.
sva-håt-kamala-saàväsaà kåtvä tu kavacaà paöhet 
nåsiàho me çiraù pätu loka-rakñätma-saàbhavaù (7)
Having seated Lord Nåsiàha upon the lotus of one’s heart, one 
should recite the following mantra - “May Lord Nåsiàha, who has 
emerged to protect the entire world, protect my head.”
sarvago ’pi stambha-väsaù phälaà me rakñatu dhvanim 
nåsiàho me dåçau pätu soma-süryägni-locanaù (8)
Although the Lord is all-pervading, (for the sake of a devotee), 
He hid Himself inside a pillar. May He protect my forehead and 
speech. May He, who has the Sun, the Moon and the Fire as His eyes, 
protect my eyes.
småtià me pätu nåhariù muni-varya-stuti-priyaù 
näsäà me siàha-näsas tu mukhaà lakñmé-mukha-priyaù (9)
May Lord Nåhari, who is pleased with the prayers offered by the 
best of sages, protect my memory. May He who has the nose of a lion 
protect my nose. May He who is fond of Lakñmé’s mouth, protect my 
mouth.
sarva-vidyädhipaù pätu nåsiàho rasanäà mama 
vaktraà pätv indu-vadanaù sadä prahläda-vanditaù (10)
May Lord Nåsiàha, who is superior in all forms of education, 
protect my sense of taste. May He whose face is as beautiful as the 
full moon and who is offered prayers by Prahläda Mahäräja protect 
my face.


===== PAGE 121 / 131 =====

115
nåsiàhaù pätu me kaëöhaà skandhau bhü-bharaëänta-kåt 
divyästra-çobhita-bhujo nåsiàhaù pätu me bhujau (11)
May Lord Nåsiàha protect my throat. He is the sustainer of the 
earth and the performer of unlimitedly wonderful activities. His 
shoulders are lustrous with divine weapons. May He protect my 
shoulders.
karau me deva-varado nåsiàhaù pätu sarvataù 
hådayaà yogi-sädhyaç ca niväsaà pätu me hariù (12)
May the Lord, Nåsiàha who showers boons on the demigods, 
protect my hands and may He protect me  from all  sides. May  Lord 
Hari who is attained by the yogis protect my heart & my residence.
madhyaà pätu hiraëyäkña-vakñaù-kukñi-vidäraëaù 
näbhià me pätu nåhariù sva-näbhi-brahma-saàstutaù (13)
May Lord Nåhari who tore open the chest and stomach of the 
asura, Hiraëyäkña protect my waist & navel. He is offered prayers by 
Brahmä who has sprung from His own navel.
brahmäëòa-koöayaù kaöyäà yasyäsau pätu me kaöim 
guhyaà me pätu guhyänäà manträëäà guhya-rüpa-dhåk (14)
May Lord Nåsiàha, on whose hips rest all the universes, 
protect my hips and  private parts. He is the knower of all mantras 
and all mysteries, but He Himself is not visible.
ürü manobhavaù pätu jänuné nara-rüpa-dhåk 
jaìghe pätu dharä-bhära-hartä yo ’sau nå-keçaré (15)
May He who is visualized by mind (through meditation) protect my 
thighs. May He who exhibits a human-like form protect my knees. May 
the remover of the burden of the earth, Nåkeçaré protect my calves.


===== PAGE 122 / 131 =====

116
sura-räjya-pradaù pätu pädau me nåharéçvaraù 
sahasra-çérñä-puruñaù  pätu me sarvaças tanum (16)
May He who bestows the heavenly kingdom on demigods protect 
my feet. Nåhari is the supreme controller, in the form of man-lion. May 
the thousand headed puruña protect my body in all respects.
mahograù pürvataù pätu mahä-vérägrajo ’gnitaù 
mahä-viñëur dakñiëe tu mahä-jvälas tu nairåtau (17)
May the fierce Lord protect me from the east. May He who is 
superior to the greatest of heroes protect me from the South East, 
which is presided over by Agni. May the Supreme Viñëu protect me 
from the South and may that person of effulgent lustre protect me 
from the South West.
paçcime pätu sarveço diçi me sarvatomukhaù 
nåsiàhaù pätu väyavyäà saumyäà bhéñaëa-vigrahaù (18)
May the Lord of everything protect me from the West. He is 
everywhere and so may He protect me from this direction. May Lord 
Nåsiàha protect me from the North West, which is presided over by 
Väyu. May He whose form is fierce, protect me from the North.
éçänyäà pätu bhadro me sarva-maìgala-däyakaù 
saàsära-bhayataù pätu måtyor måtyur nå-keçaré (19)
May He who confers all auspiciousness protect me from the North 
East, and may Nåsiàha who is death personified protect me from the 
fears of death & the cycle of being born in the material world.
idaà nåsiàha-kavacaà prahläda-mukha-maëòitam 
bhaktimän yaù paöhen nityaà sarva-päpaiù pramucyate (20)
This Nåsiàha Kavaca has been recited by Prahläda himself. A 
devotee who regularly reads this is freed from all sins.


===== PAGE 123 / 131 =====

117
putravän dhanavän loke dérghäyur upajäyate 
yaà yaà kämayate kämaà taà taà präpnoty asaàçayam 
sarvatra jayam äpnoti sarvatra vijayé bhavet 
bhümy antarikña-divyänäà grahäëäà viniväraëam (21)
(By reciting this) one may obtain sons, wealth, a long life in this 
world and attain all that one desires. There is no doubt about this. If 
one desires victory, he will become victorious and be able to ward off 
the evil effects of  all planets both earthly & heavenly.
våçcikoraga-saàbhüta-viñäpaharaëaà param 
brahma-räkñasa-yakñäëäà dürotsäraëa-käraëam (22)
He will also be able to remove the poison of scorpions and snakes 
and will drive away fierce räkñasas and yakñas  to a great distance.
bhürje vä tälapatre vä kavacaà likhitaà çubham 
kara-müle dhåtaà yena sidhyeyuù karma-siddhayaù (23)
One may inscribe this prayer on a bhürja leaf or a palm leaf and 
attach it to the wrist. Then, all his actions will bear fruit.
deväsura-manuñyeñu svaà svam eva jayaà labhet 
eka-sandhyaà tri-sandhyaà vä yaù paöhen niyato naraù (24)
He who recites this prayer, regularly, once daily or thrice daily will 
become victorious whether among men, asuras or demigods.
sarva-maìgaÿa-mäìgalyaà bhuktià muktià ca vindati 
dvä-triàçati-sahasräëi paöhec chuddhätmabhir nåbhiù (25)
He who with pure heart recites this prayer 32,000 times will obtain 
the most auspicious of all auspicious things, material enjoyment and 
(ultimately) liberation.


===== PAGE 124 / 131 =====

118
kavacasyäsya mantrasya mantra-siddhiù prajäyate 
anena mantra-räjena kåtvä bhasmäbhi mantraëam (26)
This Nåsiàha Kavaca Mantra is the king of all mantras & will 
grant all things. One attains by it what would be attained by anointing 
oneself with ashes and chanting all other mantras.
tilakaà bibhåyäd yas tu tasya graha-bhayaà haret 
tri-väraà japamänas tu dattaà väryabhimantrya ca (27)
If one applies the distinct mark on the forehead (Tilaka), with these 
ashes, sips water in the prescribed manner (äcamana) and recites this 
mantra thrice, the fear of inauspicious planets is removed.
präçayed yaà naraà mantraà nåsiàha-dhyänamäcaret 
tasya rogäù praëaçyanti ye ca syuù kukñi-sambhaväù (28)
One who meditates on Lord Nåsiàha and recites this mantra will 
be able to rid himself of his abdominal and other diseases.
kimatra bahunoktena nåsiàha-sadåço bhavet 
manasä cintitaà yat tu sa tac cäpnoty asaàçayam (29)
Why should more be said? One acquires qualitative oneness 
with Nåsiàha Himself. There is no doubt that the desires in the 
mind of one who meditates will be granted.
garjantaà garjayantaà nija-bhuja-paöalaà sphoöayantaà harantaà 
dépyantaà täpayantaà divi bhuvi ditijaà kñepayantaà kñipantam 
(30) 
krandantaà roñayantaà diçi diçi satataà saàharantaà bharantaà 
vékñantaà ghürëayantaà  kara-nikara-çatair divya-siàhaà 
namämi (31)
Lord Nåsiàha roars and causes others to roar. He splashes His 


===== PAGE 125 / 131 =====

119
many arms and tears apart the asuras. He seeks and destroys the 
descendants of Diti, wherever they be, in this world or in higher 
spheres. He throws them down & makes others also do the same. He 
screams in anger & makes others also angry. He destroys the demons 
and takes them away. He stares at them and makes them reel. He has 
hundreds of hands & I offer my respectful obeisances to the Lord, 
who has assumed the form of a transcendental lion.
iti çré-brahmäëòa-puräëe prahlädoktaà  
çré-nåsiàha-kavacaà saàpürëam.
Thus ends the Nåsiàha Kavaca as it is described by Prahläda 
Mahäräja in the Brahmäëòa Puräëa.


===== PAGE 126 / 131 =====

120
1.	
Om çré kåñëäya namaù	
2.	
Om kamalä näthäya namaù	
3.	
Om väsudeväya namaù	
4.	
Om sanätanäya namaù	
 
5.	
Om vasudevätmajäya namaù	
 
6.	
Om puëyäya namaù	
 
7.	
Om lélä mänuña vigrahäya namaù	 
8.	
Om çrévatsa kaustubha dharäya namaù	
9.	
Om yaçodä vatsaläya namaù	
10. 	 Om haraye namaù	
11.	 Om caturbhujätta cakräsi gadä çaìkhädyäyudhäya namaù	
12. 	 Om devaké nandanäya namaù	
13. 	 Om çréçäya namaù	
14.	 Om nandagopa priyätmajäya namaù	
15.	 Om yamunävega saàhäriëe namaù	
16. 	 Om balabhadra priyänujäya namaù	
17.	 Om pütanä jévitäpa haräya namaù	
18.	 Om çakaöäsura bhaïjanäya namaù	
19.	 Om nanda vraja janänandine namaù	
20. 	 Om saccidänanda vigrahäya namaù	
21. 	 Om navanéta viliptäìgäya namaù	
22. 	 Om navanéta varäya namaù	
23. 	 Om anaghäya namaù	
Çré Kåñëa Añöottara Çata Nämävali


===== PAGE 127 / 131 =====

121
24.	 Om navanéta navähäriëe namaù	
25.	 Om mucukunda prasädakäya namaù	
26.	 Om ñoòaça stré sahasreçäya namaù	
27.	 Om tribhaìgine namaù	
28.	 Om madhuräkåtaye namaù	
29.	 Om çuka vägamåtäbdhéndave namaù	
30.	 Om govindäya namaù	
31.	 Om yoginäà pataye namaù	
32.	 Om vatsaväöa caräya namaù	
33.	 Om anantäya namaù	
34.	 Om dhenukäsura bhaïjanäya namaù	
35.	 Om tåëékåta tåëävartäya namaù	
36.	 Om yamalärjuna bhaïjanäya namaù	
37.	 Om uttäla täla bhetre namaù	
38.	 Om gopa gopéçvaräya namaù	
39.	 Om yogine namaù	
40.	 Om koöisürya samaprabhäya namaù	
41.	 Om iläpataye namaù	
42.	 Om paraàjyotiñe namaù	
43.	 Om yädavendräya namaù	
44.	 Om yadüdvahäya namaù	
45.	 Om vanamäline namaù	
46.	 Om pétaväsine namaù	
47.	 Om pärijätäpahärakäya namaù	
48.	 Om govardhanäcaloddhartre namaù	


===== PAGE 128 / 131 =====

122
49.	 Om gopäläya namaù	
50.	 Om sarva pälakäya namaù	
51.	 Om ajäya namaù	
52.	 Om niraïjanäya namaù	
53.	 Om kämajanakäya namaù	
54.	 Om kaïja locanäya namaù	
 
55.	 Om madhughne namaù	
56.	 Om mathurä näthäya namaù	
57.	 Om dvärakä näyakäya namaù	
 
58.	 Om baline namaù	
 
59.	 Om våndävanänta saïcäriëe namaù	
  
60. 	 Om tulasé däma bhüñaëäya namaù	 
61.	 Om syamantaka maëi hartre namaù	
62.	 Om nara näräyaëätmakäya namaù	
63.	 Om kubjä kåñëämbara dharäya namaù	
64.	 Om mäyine namaù
65.	 Om parama puruñäya namaù	
66.	 Om muñöikäsura cäëüra-malla yuddha viçäradäya namaù	
67.	 Om saàsära vairiëe namaù	
 
68.	 Om kaàsäraye namaù	
 
69.	 Om muräraye namaù	
 
70.	 Om narakäntakäya namaù	
71.	 Om anädi brahmacäriëe namaù	
72.	 Om kåñëä vyasana karñakäya namaù	
73.	 Om çiçupäla çiraç chetre namaù	


===== PAGE 129 / 131 =====

123
74.	 Om duryodhana kuläntakäya namaù	
 
75.	 Om viduräkrüra varadäya namaù	 
76.	 Om viçvarüpa pradarçakäya namaù	
 
77.	 Om satyaväce namaù	
78.	 Om satya saìkalpäya namaù	
79.	 Om satyabhämä ratäya namaù	
 
80.	 Om jayine namaù	
81.	 Om subhadrä pürvajäya namaù	
82.	 Om jiñëave namaù	
  
83.	 Om bhéñma muktipradäyakäya namaù	
 
84.	 Om jagadgurave namaù	
 
85.	 Om jagannäthäya namaù	
86.	 Om veëunäda viçäradäya namaù	
87.	 Om våñabhäsura vidhvaàsine namaù	
 
88.	 Om bäëäsura karäntakäya namaù	 
89.	 Om yudhiñöhira pratiñöhätre namaù	
90.	 Om barhi barhävataàsakäya namaù	
91.	 Om pärtha särathaye namaù	
92.	 Om avyaktäya namaù	
93.	 Om gétämåta mahodadhaye namaù	
94.	 Om käléya phaëi mäëikya raïjita çrépadämbujäya namaù
95.	 Om dämodaräya namaù	
96.	 Om yajïa bhoktre namaù	
97.	 Om dänavendra vinäçakäya namaù	
98.	 Om näräyaëäya namaù	


===== PAGE 130 / 131 =====

124
99.	 Om parabrahmaëe namaù
100.	Om pannagäçana vähanäya namaù	
101.	Om jalakréòä samäsakta gopé vasträpahärakäya namaù	
102.	Om puëya çlokäya namaù	
103.	Om térthapädäya namaù	
104.	Om veda vedyäya namaù	
105.	Om dayä nidhaye namaù	
106.	Om sarva térthätmakäya namaù 
107.	Om sarvagraha rüpiëe namaù	
108.	Om parätparäya namaù


===== PAGE 131 / 131 =====

125
