===== PAGE 1 / 161 =====



===== PAGE 2 / 161 =====

2


===== PAGE 3 / 161 =====

3
PUBLISHERS’ NOTE 
‘The Teachings of the Bhagavadgita’ is a series of 
ten discourses given by His Holiness Sri Swami 
Krishnanandaji Maharaj 
to 
the 
students 
of 
the 
Yoga 
Vedanta 
Forest 
Academy, 
Basic 
Course-9 
during the months of May and June, 1982.  
In these profound expositions, Sri Swamiji Maharaj 
takes the students of the Academy and all readers of 
this series step 
by 
step 
through 
the 
profound 
depths 
of 
the 
Bhagavadgita. These talks are a 
more condensed version of the much larger series of 
talks given earlier, which was published in 1980 
under the title ‘The Philosophy of the Bhagavadgita’. 
Though there are similarities in the layout of both 
presentations, there is a sense of uniqueness expressed 
in these talks with the emphasis on instructional 
teachings, which all seekers of the truth will find very 
useful and a most wonderful compliment to the earlier 
published work. 


===== PAGE 4 / 161 =====

4
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Publishers’ Note 
Chapter 1: This Drama of Life 
Chapter 2: The Difficulties of the Spiritual Seeker 
Chapter 3: Samkhya—Right Understanding
Chapter 4: Duty—An Empirical Manifestation of True Being 
Chapter 5: Life as a Yajna or Sacrifice 
Chapter 6: Self-Restraint and the Nature of the Self 
Chapter 7: Meditation—A Discipline of Self-Integration 
Chapter 8: Creation and Life After Death 
Chapter 9: The Majesty of God-Consciousness 
Chapter 10: The One Supreme Absolute Alone Is 


===== PAGE 5 / 161 =====

Discourse 1 
THIS DRAMA OF LIFE 
When you come to a place like this, you have to re-
orientate your minds, to a large extent, to an 
appreciable extent. There is a specific purpose for 
which you have come here to this Academy, to this 
Divine Life Society Ashram. To some of you, the 
purpose of your coming here and attending these 
classes may be clear; to some, it may be nebulous—not 
wholly perspicuous. There is something which this 
Academy is endeavouring to cater to the minds of 
people like you. This ‘something’ which this Ashram, 
this Academy, is trying to furnish you with, is perhaps 
what you actually need in life. You may be under the 
impression that there are thousands of things that you 
need in life. This is a thorough misconception which has 
to be removed from the mind—you are not in need of 
one thousand things in this world. And the difficulties 
that you face in life are also not caused by one thousand 
things. 
There is a little error in the very way of our thinking 
into which we have been born, right from our 
babyhood. Conditions of society, circumstances of 
family, and the weaknesses of personality, combined 
together, prevent us from undergoing the necessary 
educational discipline which is essential for you to 
know where you really stand in this world. We take 
generally things for granted—we are sons and 
daughters of somebody, we are nationals of a particular 
country, we are working in some office; we have this 
5


===== PAGE 6 / 161 =====

6
problem and that difficulty. This is a natural human 
way of thinking, but a human way of thinking itself is 
not a remedy for human problems. A human way of 
thinking, is not a remedy for human problems—is a 
sentence we ought to underline—because human 
problems can be tackled only by a power of 
understanding which is superior to the ordinary human 
way of thinking. A medicine which is of the same 
character as an illness may not be able to set right the 
illness one suffers from. There is a specific influence 
which the medicine administered into your body exerts 
upon you, due to which you seem to be recovering from 
your illness. A friend of the illness that have cannot be a 
remedy for the illness. The medical treatment cannot 
be an associate of the disease; it is a rectifying factor 
and, therefore, it differs in the function and constitution 
from the illness you suffer from. The problems of 
human life are a sort of illness, which cannot be 
rectified by a purely human way of understanding, as 
this human way of thinking itself is the cause of human 
problems. So there is a necessity to lift yourself up from 
this so-called ‘human outlook of life’ and visualise the 
whole of life from a viewpoint or standpoint which is, in 
a way, superior to what you call ‘the human way of 
thinking’. This art, this science, this system of living is, 
very very unfortunately, not known to many people in 
the world because of the fact that most people are sunk 
in this routine of ordinary thinking, which you usually 
call ‘the human way of thinking’, and you know what 
the human way of thinking is. 
Swami Sivananda, the founder of this institution, 
had a specific mission to hold aloft in life before 
mankind, which was not merely to teach you what 


===== PAGE 7 / 161 =====

7 
 
anybody else has taught you, but to awaken you—not 
merely to sermon, or give a gospel. A sleeping man has 
to be woken up before anything is taught to him. There 
is no use of giving you a sermon when you are asleep. 
The first thing is to awaken you from the dream or the 
sleep in which you are. When you are able to see things 
in a better way, you may be told what is essential for 
you; if you are asleep there is no use of speaking to you. 
So the role which great men of stature, like Swami 
Sivananda, played in life seems to be the function of 
awakening man rather than teaching man in the 
ordinary sense of the term; and you know very well the 
importance of waking a person from sleep—it is not in 
any way less important than giving him a sermon or 
giving him a teaching of any kind. If you are awake, 
perhaps you know where things stand and where you 
are. 
So goes this little introduction that I place before 
you which may brush and burnish your brains. You are 
here with a deconditioned mind, and not a conditioned 
mind with which you must have come. You carry your 
own minds and brains when you come from distant 
places; that mind, that brain, should now be able to 
think and organise itself in a new way altogether. This 
is the humble effort of this academy. It is humble 
because it is not possible to sweeten the whole ocean 
with any amount of sugar that we have in this world. 
However, some sugar can be added into the ocean—
that is a great satisfaction. Even a hundred bags of 
sugar will not sweeten the ocean; a thousand bags, no! 
However, there is a satisfaction of having performed a 
duty. One way or the other, the saltwaters may become 
sweet. So, this saltwater of human life has to be 


===== PAGE 8 / 161 =====

8 
 
sweetened with the new outlook which is superhuman. 
Unless you are able to aspire at least for a superhuman 
level of existence—though you may not be able to place 
yourself in that condition at once—unless there is at 
least this longing for that condition which is larger than 
and deeper than the human level, you will not be able 
to have peace of mind in this world. The judgment of 
things is possible only by a person who is superior to 
the things judged, for which purpose you have to be a 
little more than an ordinary man. 
In this context of the great learning of the art of 
living, I have been requested by the organisation of this 
Academy to speak to you something about the most 
interesting and stimulating message given by the 
Bhagavadgita, a term which you are all very much 
familiar with—a great scripture of yoga. You are having 
many other lessons also on yoga; you have Patanjali’s 
yoga, you have Bhakti yoga, and you have many other 
sidelights thrown on this great, eluding thing called 
yoga. This specific theme which I am supposed to place 
before you is not an easy thing to understand—but it is 
not impossible to understand. It requires a little 
exercise 
of 
your 
mind 
with 
a 
discipline 
of 
concentration. The Bhagavadgita is a holy text which 
everybody reads, like the New Testament or the Bible, 
or the Tripitakas. We have a habit, again which is 
human to which I alluded just now, of revering, adoring 
holy texts as deities, worshipping them on our altars, 
and carrying them on our heads but understanding 
nothing of what they say. The holy texts are not to be 
carried on the head merely as deities of worship, 
though they may be also deities. They are medicines, 
which you do not merely keep in a cupboard and adore 


===== PAGE 9 / 161 =====

9 
 
as a holy stuff. It is something which is to be taken in, 
absorbed into your system and made part and parcel of 
your very biological, psychological, and rational system 
of living. 
The Bhagavadgita is the great gospel which 
Bhagavan Sri Krishna spoke. Historically speaking, 
many many years ago, under a special context of the 
Mahabharata, the great epic which, as you perhaps 
already know, is an epic of life as a whole. The question 
which this great text tries to solve and answer is the 
question of life of man. Your life in this world is a great 
question mark before you. What are you? Who are you? 
What is it that is expected of you and what is it that you 
expect from this world? These are questions before us 
and we may not be able to answer these questions off-
hand. Where are we seated now? We have a simple glib 
answer which may not be the correct answer. I will tell 
you how even very small things may not be the things 
we actually bring into action in our life—like the 
location of yours, here, at this present moment, to give 
you only one simple, concrete, gross example. Where 
are you sitting now, at this present moment? You can 
have many answers to this question. You are sitting in 
the hall of a library of the Sivananda Ashram, in the 
campus of The Divine Life Society. This is a very correct 
answer, and nobody can say that you are wrong in 
saying that just now, “I am seated in the hall of the 
library of this Ashram.” But you can also say, “I am 
living in the state of Uttar Pradesh. I come from Madras, 
Maharashtra, Punjab or the United States, etc. I am now 
in India.” This is also a correct answer—you are now 
sitting in India, and not merely in this little hall. Though 
it may be true that you are in a hall, it is not untrue that 


===== PAGE 10 / 161 =====

10 
 
you are in India. Perhaps you are likely to be more free 
and liberated in your psychological operations when 
you feel that you are in India, rather than feel that you 
are in a little hall. You yourself will know the difference 
between these two ways of thinking—“I am in India, 
not in a little hall.” You may also say that, “I am on the 
surface of the earth”; this is also true. You are sitting on 
the earth, on the surface. You are not sitting in a hall, 
which is only a concept in your mind. You are on a 
spaceship. Do you know what a spaceship is? You know 
very well what it is; and the earth is a spaceship. To 
move in space and rattle through space, you need not 
go to the moon or some other planet—you are just in 
that condition even now. This is a little planet, the 
earth, on which you are seated, and it is moving with 
such rapidity in space that to be in the moon or the 
earth—it makes no difference to you. When you go to 
the moon you will find yourself in the same condition 
as you are now finding yourself when seated on the 
earth. Just as you do not know that the earth is moving 
now, you will not know that the moon is moving if you 
are sitting there. So goes the way in which the mind 
thinks. 
You 
are 
also 
in 
a 
solar 
system, 
a 
large 
electromagnetic field which runs vitally from one 
planet to the centre of the sun. You are not in a library 
hall, sitting here. You are in a terribly powerful 
magnetic field operating between the sun and this 
earth. There is no empty space between the sun and 
this earth; it is electricity operating, and we are terribly 
influenced by every planet, every thing that is between 
us and every other planet. The sun and the whole solar 
system is conditioned by another system called the 


===== PAGE 11 / 161 =====

11 
 
‘Nebular Organisation’, the Milky Way, etc. which 
contains thousands and thousands of solar systems like 
us. We are now in the Milky Way, a part of it. We will 
not be able to think with our minds the way in which 
we are accustomed to, if the mind is to be lifted like 
this—higher and higher into wider regions of location. 
We are not sitting in a little hall, we are not even on the 
earth. We are in a vast spatial and temporal expanse 
which is influencing us from moment to moment, so 
that we may say that we are living in this vast universe, 
not in a library hall. And each one of you will be able to 
appreciate the difference that it will make to you if you 
are able to think that you are living in a vast expanse of 
this astronomical universe than this little thinking that 
you are in a small room in the academy campus. You 
are right in thinking that you are in the academy 
campus in a small room, but you can also be right in a 
more intensive manner if you know that you are in a 
larger dimension of the whole set-up of this terrible 
creation before you, and you are in that. 
The Bhagavadgita, thus, does not take any one 
standpoint in answering questions of life. It takes every 
standpoint. Otherwise, the study of human life—or any 
life for the matter of that—may not be complete. A very 
expert physician takes into consideration every aspect 
of the possibility of illness of a person, and doesn’t treat 
only one aspect. Otherwise, there will be reaction from 
that aspect which is ignored or neglected in 
observation. A total answer is given to a total question 
in the Bhagavadgita. There is only a single question 
before us, and a single answer will come from every 
corner of the world. The question is single because we 
are involved in a single, uniform manner with the large 


===== PAGE 12 / 161 =====

12 
 
environment in which we are living, and the answer 
also has to be a complete answer. As is this human 
organism a complete system of operation, so is our 
relationship to the whole environment of ours—a 
complete involvement. All of our involvements are 
complete and total to the core. Hence, any educational 
endeavour has to be a thoroughgoing and incisive, in-
depth inquiry into the structure of all things. 
This occasion arose at a moment when the 
Mahabharata war was to take place—a question that 
arose in the mind of Arjuna, who in a way represents 
mankind in general. That personality called ‘Arjuna’ 
represents man as such. He stands for me, you, and 
everybody else. As a member in a parliament may stand 
for a particular constituency and represent the voice of 
those people there from where he is elected, Arjuna 
may represent man as such, everybody included. The 
question that arose in his mind is the question that may 
arise in every one of our minds. What is this question? 
In the earlier stages, this so-called Arjuna representing 
man, thought like anybody else in the world—“I shall 
do this, and I shall see that I succeed in my endeavour.” 
We are also saying the same thing, “I will do this; I have 
to go there.” And, naturally you are not going to get 
defeated in your attempt. You don’t embark upon a 
project to get repelled—you go there for a success in 
your enterprise. This is how we think, and like that 
Arjuna also thought. But, things were not so easy when 
he had to confront that which he could not avoid in the 
fulfilment of enterprise or the project he was engaging 
himself in. Even when you want to build a house, you 
are not going to think merely of brick, cement and iron; 
this is not the only thing that is involved in the 


===== PAGE 13 / 161 =====

13 
 
construction of a house. There are larger things, such as 
the occupation of the land, the ownership, the title 
deed, the legal association, the architectural plan and 
the budget involved in it, and your financial status—
hundreds of things come into the picture, apart from 
merely the question of their being the necessity for 
brick and mortar etc. Many other things also are there, 
other than what I mentioned as instances. The war in 
which a person like Arjuna was engaged was not a 
simple encounter. You do not start anything unless you 
know everything about it. Otherwise, as the poet said, 
you would be like a fool who tries to tread where even 
angels will not like to move. 
Arjuna, the representative of man, who thought as 
any one of us thinks, found himself in a difficulty when 
he had to confront life’s problems. The word 
‘confrontation’ is very unpalatable. It implies a kind of 
opposition you are trying to face—which war is, battle 
is, and perhaps any encounter or enterprise is. Any 
enterprise in life is an opposition you are facing. Any 
activity of any kind is the effort on your part, to solve a 
question arisen on account of an opposition that is in 
front of you; if there is no opposition of any kind, no 
activity would be essential in life. You need not do 
anything—you can be just there, where you are—but 
life is a battle, inwardly as well as outwardly. It is a 
battle because there is conflict everywhere. You will 
never find a very smooth movement of anything 
without a rattling of conflicting elements, which 
movement of any kind is. 
Our very personal existence as a human body is a 
phenomenon of battle going on in what you call the 
biological system, which is not a static, concrete, 


===== PAGE 14 / 161 =====

14 
 
unmoving entity—it is a tremendous movement. You 
have grown into the stature of your present maturity of 
body due to a transmutation process which has been 
going on ever since your birth, and transmutation or 
transformation is nothing but a process of being born 
and dying at the same time. An earlier stage dies, and a 
new stage is born in every evolutionary process. That 
which ‘was’ has gone and that which ‘is not’ is to arrive. 
The arriving of a new thing is the birth, so-called, and 
the going away of that which is now, and giving way to 
that which is not, is the death of the earlier one. Birth 
and death, the coming and the going of things, is the 
drama of existence. A Nataka, a drama, a performance 
in a theatre is a terrible movement—it is not a static 
action, it is not the mere existing of people on a stage. 
There is a movement, which is involved in the coming 
and going of people—some role comes in and some role 
has an exit. Otherwise, you would have all the dramatis 
personae standing there before you and not saying 
anything; there will not be a play. A play involves the 
coming and going of various actors; and the coming and 
going of various actors is what you call the scenes in the 
drama or the enactment—the play. In this sense we 
may say the life of this world is a great enactment of 
many people, coming in and going and playing the role 
in some way, and then having their exit, not being seen 
again. “The world is a large stage.” This is what 
Shakespeare mentions in a beautiful passage in his As 
You Like It, perhaps. We are all actors in the large play. 
Now, when you take up a particular part in an 
enactment or a drama, you know very well that there 
are other actors also, and you are not the sole actor in 
that performance. Your relationship to other people in 


===== PAGE 15 / 161 =====

15 
 
that particular performance is the vital thing you have 
to understand. There may be friends and enemies, 
which are the roles you may have to play—maybe you 
are enacting the Ramayana or the Mahabharata or 
some such thing. Every actor performs a particular 
duty. And in the sense of that particularisation of the 
duty, one is different from the other. There is no vital 
connection between one actor and another, inasmuch 
as one actor is concerned only with his or her role, and 
not with the role played by other people in the drama. 
In that sense every one of us is independent—you have 
no connection with me, I am not concerned with you. I 
do what I am expected to do in the little circumference 
or the circumscribed area of my life, and so on is the 
case with you also. But, there is a unity of structure in 
the whole play; otherwise it would not be a play at all. 
In spite of the individuality and the isolated 
performances of the different actors, maybe hundreds 
in number, there is a unity of purpose, an aim and 
objective with which the drama is played - the objective 
being in the mind of the director who knows which 
actor will play which role and what unity there can be 
between the performance of one and the performance 
of another. It is not merely the director as an individual 
that is supposed to know the unity of purpose. Even the 
individuals will be aware of it, without which 
knowledge there would not be a harmonious element 
in respect of other elements, notwithstanding the fact 
for the purpose of their performance they are 
individuals. 
Here is a little hint that I place before you as to the 
structure of our social life itself. We are, outwardly 
speaking, independent persons. Each one is a free 


===== PAGE 16 / 161 =====

16 
 
bird—we can fly in any way we like - but we are not so 
free as we may imagine, under the pressure of an error 
of thinking. In a democratic set-up of a government, 
each person is free; that is the very meaning of 
democracy. You are not a shackled person; you are not 
limited in the operation of your daily performance—
you are a free man. That is democracy. But you are not 
a hundred percent free; a hundred percent freedom 
given to every person would end in a destruction of the 
very system of democracy, because two hundred 
percents are unknown—like two infinities. There will 
be a clash of persons in one second. In spite of the 
independence and freedom given to individuals in this 
free set-up of things, there is a restraint exerted upon 
each individual which you call the operation of law; you 
may call it the government if you like. So, there is a 
restraint that you have to exercise on your part, 
together with the freedom that you are exercising in 
life. So restraint and freedom are not opposites, though 
they are opposites from the point of view of a 
dictionary meaning of these words. How can restraint 
and freedom be the same thing? They are two different 
things, but they are not contradictories. Do you know 
that in the exercise of your freedom as a citizen of a 
democratic nation, you are also restraining yourself 
from interfering with the freedom of other people? Is it 
not restraint? Do you say that the restraint is in any 
way opposed to the freedom that you are endowed 
with? So, freedom and discipline are not opposites, and 
perhaps the one cannot be there without the other. 
But, the human mind being very weak for obvious 
reasons, is not always able to think in this disciplined 
manner. Most of us are undisciplined, indisciplined 


===== PAGE 17 / 161 =====

17 
 
persons. We have a desire for license to do anything. 
This is not merely not a superhuman way of thinking, it 
is not even a decent human way of thinking. “Each one 
for himself and devil take the hindmost” is not 
democracy. It is a duty that each one feels, not only in 
regard to oneself but also in regard to others. Many of 
us are not meant for a pure democratic living, since we 
are unable to think in such a large way which is 
essential for this charitable way of existence you call 
democracy. In one way at least, you may say the 
universe is like a large democratic organisation, though 
it is not merely that; it is something else also, to which 
we shall refer later on. Everyone has a duty in this 
world, not only to one’s self but also to others. You 
know this very well—a simple truth. You have a duty 
towards yourself, and in the performance of this duty in 
regard to yourself you are free; nobody obstructs the 
performance of the duty you owe to your own self. But, 
in the duty that you owe to others, you are under the 
impulsion of a law that operates transcendent to your 
individuality—transcendent because it is wider than 
your personality, it is comprehensive of all other people 
also, in whose relationship you as an individual are 
involved. 
The law of a country is larger than the person or the 
individual who is free. Every person in a nation is free, 
yet the law is superior to every person. Unless it is 
superior it cannot exercise a control over others. One 
individual cannot restrain another individual, because 
both are on par, as far as they are individuals. A control 
can be exercised only by a superior power which is 
super-individualistic, and thus is law. Every disciplined 
law system rule is super-individualistic. If it is confined 


===== PAGE 18 / 161 =====

18 
 
to the individual only, it cannot operate in respect of 
other people outside, external to the individual. So 
there is a law operating in the world which gives you 
freedom to act, and at the same time restrains you in a 
powerful manner. So I come to the point again, that 
restraint and freedom are not opposites—they are co-
relatives. They co-exist, they are co-extensive, co-
eternal, and one cannot be without the other. An 
ordinary weak mind, not properly tutored or educated, 
will not be able to think in this manner. Arjuna was not 
able to think always like this. He was the son of so-and-
so, he was a Kshatriya, he had a right over some land 
for which he was to fight—that was all that seems to 
have been in his mind, and he was not wholly educated, 
perhaps, in the art of thinking in a manner which is 
required by the existence of things which are not 
always visible to the eyes. 
This transcendent principle which is called law, 
which operates in a country and operates in the world, 
operates everywhere, is not always a pleasant thing for 
a person who seeks a hundred percent freedom to one’s 
own self. Nobody likes the word ‘law’; it is a hateful 
word. We do not like the word ‘discipline’—we resent 
it. It is very bitter to hear these terms because we are 
not prepared to allow that amount of freedom to others 
which we like to allow to our own selves, which 
requires a slight impersonality on our part, above and 
transcendent to our individual way of thinking which, 
given a long rope, will be the centre of selfishness. 
Selfishness, is the affirmation of yourself as the whole 
reality and an unpreparedness to accept that others 
also exist around you. You are not prepared even to 
acquiesce in the existence of other people. You alone 


===== PAGE 19 / 161 =====

19 
 
are and, “Nobody else can be in front of me.” This is 
selfishness, this is tyranny, this is a dictator gone 
amuck. “Let me alone exist and others be not.” This is 
the height of selfishness. But it can present itself in a 
milder form when we stick to our own guns and would 
not be prepared to be charitable enough to accept the 
viewpoints of other people also, much less give them 
the freedom that they would like to enjoy as we 
ourselves would like. The world is not made in the way 
in which we are thinking it to be constituted—things 
are not what they seem. The law I refer to is not outside 
you. We do not like the operation of law because we are 
under the impression that it is outside us—somebody 
is harassing us from outside by saying that there is a 
law. Law is not an external existence—it is something 
in which you yourself are involved. In this sense, you 
are involved in the world also. So in this sense again, 
the world is not outside you, as the law is not outside. 
The relationship that obtains between you and the 
world is what is called law. It is not made by man; it 
exists, as the law of gravitation exists if man is not to be 
at all. 
This is a new education into which we have to be 
introduced, if we have to enjoy a peaceful existence in 
this world. One who violates law cannot be protected 
by law, and therefore he cannot have any peace. And if 
we are insistent on considering others as totally 
externals—the world is unrelated to us, which we are 
merely to exploit in some way or the other—then the 
law will catch hold of us. If you are not prepared to 
accept a law which accepts the existence of other 
people, you will be unhappy in this world. You may say 
that we are all unhappy because of the violation of a 


===== PAGE 20 / 161 =====

20 
 
law - not necessarily the law that man has made in a 
parliament, but a law which conditions even the laws 
made in the parliament. Why do you violate such laws? 
Because you are not sufficiently educated. That was the 
condition in which Arjuna found himself when he saw a 
huge army of friends, relations, etc., in that context of 
the Mahabharata battle. It is a fear to face relations, 
friends, and related objects. That roused up a question 
of what one has to do in this large set-up of things. It 
was not a question of Arjuna, but a question of man as 
such. It is not a question concerning the Mahabharata 
battle; it is a question concerning the struggle for 
existence itself. This question has to be answered, and 
here is the Bhagavadgita. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 21 / 161 =====

21 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
THE DIFFICULTIES OF THE SPIRITUAL SEEKER 
Spiritual life is the greatest of adventures. In that way 
we can compare it to a battle. It involves careful 
preparation, as in a war. And, when you engage 
yourself in a war you do not go there merely to get 
defeated and thrown out; the intention is to win 
victory. So the practice of yoga, which is the greatest 
project that a person can embark upon in life, is in a 
way comparable to a battle or an encounter, for the 
purpose of which one has to make an almost infinite set 
of preparations—for days and months and years 
perhaps—as a culmination of one’s existence here, as 
the fruit of the tree of one’s whole life in this world. 
Hence, great care and caution has to be exercised. In a 
hurry, in a bustle and in a state of emotional 
enthusiasm, we are not supposed to enter into this field 
called ‘life spiritual’. It is not an entering into a new way 
of life; rather it is an embracing of all life together in 
your own life. You are not going to live an isolated, 
queer type of cave life psychologically, but you are 
going to broaden your outlook and your vision of 
things, so that all life is included in your own life and 
your life becomes commensurate with every other kind 
of living. 
You have heard that yoga is a union with something. 
It is a union no doubt, but with what? There are endless 
answers to this question. With what are you going to 
unite yourself in that you call yoga? The difficulty in 


===== PAGE 22 / 161 =====

22 
 
answering 
this 
question 
arises 
due 
to 
a 
misrepresentation of facts by our senses, which 
indoctrinate us into the belief that we are independent 
contents of this world—each person is independent 
and perhaps one has nothing to do with the other, 
finally. I have touched upon this theme to some extent 
yesterday. But the truth is that you are not so 
independent as you imagine yourself to be. You have a 
freedom which is constrained by the operation of a 
universal law. A kind of violation of this universal 
principle is perpetrated every day in our life when we 
cling to things as externals, either in love or in hatred. 
Whether you like a thing or dislike a thing, your 
attitude towards the thing is almost identical from the 
point of view of pure psychology. Like and dislike are 
two aspects of a single attitude which is totally 
erroneous. Life is a continuity and is not constituted of 
bits or shreds, with no connection with one another. It 
is impossible to define life, because it is itself a 
definition of itself. There are certain things which 
cannot be defined in words other than the ones we use 
to 
designate 
them 
or 
indicate 
them—‘life’, 
‘consciousness’, 
even 
‘mind’ 
are 
indefinable 
peculiarities. 
When we take to the path of the spirit, tread the way 
of yoga or in the true sense of the term we become 
religious, we do not shrink, but expand; we do not lose, 
but gain; we do not become disassociated but get more 
and more associated in a vital, true manner. Religion 
has many a time, through the process of history, been 
described as a passage to the other world, so that this 
world 
has 
no 
connection 
with 
religion, 
yoga, 
spirituality, or even God Himself. This interpretation of 


===== PAGE 23 / 161 =====

23 
 
the religious outlook as an ‘other-worldly affair’ has 
insinuated itself into the blood of people, to such an 
extent that it has not left us even till this moment. 
There is always a tendency to look up to the skies when 
we pray to God as disassociated from our brethren 
around us and unconnected with the footstool of the 
earth. Why we are made to think in this manner is a 
question which takes us to psychology, perhaps 
psychoanalysis. We are born and bred in an 
atmosphere which, perhaps, we carry through many 
lives that we have passed through; and in addition to 
the atmospheric influence of society, the type of life of 
the parents, the kind of education we are imparted—in 
addition to all these, we also carry certain impressions 
of previous lives when we are born into this world. All 
these put together, errors piled over errors, prevent us 
from freeing ourselves from this common notion that 
the creator is an extra-cosmic existence and therefore 
life—spiritual, religious, or of yoga—has also to be 
extra-cosmic. This error is to be rooted out, and the 
Bhagavadgita has no other purpose to achieve. It is a 
recipe, like a medical prescription, and it is not merely a 
holy book that you have simply to worship every day. 
You do not simply worship a medical prescription—it 
has to be taken into action for the purpose it is 
intended for. 
The yoga of the Bhagavadgita is a complete 
prescription for the maladies of life. It is a total panacea 
that we are provided with by means of a vision which 
we can best describe as cosmic. The one who imparted 
this knowledge and the one who received this 
knowledge were en rapport with each other; and the 
Guru-disciple relationship is precisely this much. It is 


===== PAGE 24 / 161 =====

24 
 
the capacity of the receiver to raise himself to the level 
of the height from which this knowledge descends, or 
oftentimes the other way around—the Guru may have 
to come down to the level of the receptive capacity of 
the disciple, as it becomes necessary in the process of 
teaching in schools and colleges. You cannot always be 
on a high pedestal and look down upon the student, 
because the student will receive nothing when you are 
speaking from a higher level. So, the relationship 
between Guru and disciple is a mysterious one. We 
cannot easily say whether the Guru comes down or the 
disciple goes up. It is a miracle that is taking place. The 
Guru is a miracle, the disciple also is a miracle, who is 
able to receive this knowledge, and the process of this 
communication also is a wonder. Āścaryavat paśyati 
kaścid enam āścaryavad vadati tathaiva cānyaḥ (Gita 
2.29)—says the Bhagavadgita. It is all a miracle! All 
great things in the world are wonders. They are not 
equations that you can solve almost instantaneously by 
calculus. Anything that you try to know deeply and 
carry it to the logical limits of its understanding—
anything of this sort will elude your grasp because all 
our endowments of grasping are empirical, sensory, 
and even what we call logical understanding is 
conditioned by sensory operations. 
Thus, Arjuna was confounded, as any one of us can 
be. In this adventure of spiritual life, which is 
metaphorically presented before us in the form of the 
Mahabharata, we are likely to be faced with certain 
doubts and difficulties. While in the earlier stages it 
may appear that the whole sky is very clear, when you 
move onwards you’ll find that heavy, thick clouds are 
hanging above your heads, and there is darkness in the 


===== PAGE 25 / 161 =====

25 
 
front. This is the darkness of the spiritual aspiration. 
The first chapter of the Bhagavadgita is a chapter of 
sorrow of the seeker—Arjuna Vishada Yoga. It is the 
weeping of the seeking individual. However, you will be 
surprised to note that the colophon or the concluding 
line of the first chapter is designated Arjuna Vishada 
Yoga. It is a yoga, and not merely a weeping after a 
bereavement or a loss. A crying and a weeping, 
despondency and a melancholy mood cannot be called 
yoga in any sense of the term. A confounding of the 
mind is not yoga; but the Bhagavadgita ends with this 
term ‘yoga’ even in regard to the first chapter, which is 
nothing but the weeping of Arjuna and a presentation 
of various kinds of doubts and difficulties which seem 
to harass his mind. Why is it called yoga? Why is such a 
sanctified name attached to this melancholy chapter, 
the first one in the Bhagavadgita? This is something 
which is important for us to understand. You know 
medical men give vaccination to prevent you from 
having an illness, and you are in a state of temporary 
illness after the vaccination. If you are given an anti-
illness injection, that injection itself will produce a sort 
of illness. Notwithstanding the fact that the inoculation 
or the vaccination produces a sort of sure temperature 
or illness in your body, it has to be considered a process 
of cure and it is not to be considered an illness really in 
the true sense of the term—otherwise, you would have 
had a real illness which would have been more 
devastating. 
The complacency of a happy person in this world is 
really a danger to the individual. This was the 
complacency of Arjuna and the foolhardy heroism that 
he manifested before he entered the battlefield. A 


===== PAGE 26 / 161 =====

26 
 
person who may be appearing to be healthy and very 
pleasant in his life may be attacked by an epidemic 
tomorrow, and this possibility cannot be prevented 
merely by a precedent happiness a day earlier. The 
tentative illness that you seem to be in, psychologically, 
when you tread the path of yoga is the one in which 
many of us find ourselves—a sense of having lost 
oneself and a feeling that one does not know where one 
is standing, which feeling you would not have had 
before you took to the spiritual way of living or the path 
of yoga. People are happy in this world. They are 
travelling all directions and eat well, sleep well, they go 
to clubs—there is no trouble with anybody in the 
world. But the trouble arises the moment you turn to 
the spirit and take to a religious life or what you call 
yoga. You are confounded in a new manner altogether, 
a confusion which might not have presented itself 
before you when you were a happy bird in the free 
world outside. Why is this? How are you going to 
explain this new difficulty that you are facing when you 
are moving in the direction of God, even if you are to be 
honest in this pursuit? Every spiritual seeker may be 
said to be uniformly in this condition of difficulty—a 
kind of reaction that is set up by the very idea of taking 
to yoga. 
The first chapter, which is a yoga no doubt, is yoga 
in a very, very specific sense. Difficulties and doubts of 
the type expressed in the first chapter are not likely to 
arise in the minds of people who are normally happy in 
the work-a-day world. When you investigate deeply, 
philosophically, into the structure of things, you’ll have 
doubts which would not have occurred to your mind 
normally. Nobody bothers about how the world came 


===== PAGE 27 / 161 =====

27 
 
in, why the sun is rising always in the east, and where 
does it go in the night. These questions do not arise in 
the minds of anybody; everything is taken for granted. 
But when you start probing into these difficulties, 
mysteries—why the planets are going round the sun, 
and what is it that is happening when we have seasons 
and when we are feeling heat in summer and cold in 
winter—though these questions are never put by 
anybody and they are all taken for granted, yet when 
you put these questions you have to scratch your head 
three times before you answer them. “What is 
happening? Why is it cold in one place and hot in 
another place even in the same season?” etc., etc. These 
are to give you only some gross instances of problems 
that you may have to face when you question anything; 
otherwise, everything is fine. 
Without going into large details, since we have not 
much time before us, I sum up this principle of a 
problem arising before a spiritual seeker as put forth by 
Arjuna in his own words in the first chapter. When you 
take to the path of yoga, certain difficulties will arise in 
your mind. Some questions will arise. One: “Is it really 
going to be a successful adventure on my side? Am I 
really going to get anything, or am I a fool?” This 
question will not arise in the beginning. These 
questions will arise after some time, after years of 
practice, because you will find that you have achieved 
nothing, for some obvious reasons. Then the question 
will arise, “Is this a profitable adventure or is it merely 
a will-o’-the-wisp that I am pursuing? There is no 
surety that I’m going to succeed when I’ve achieved 
nothing for the last many years. If for the last twenty 
years I have achieved nothing, what is the certainty that 


===== PAGE 28 / 161 =====

28 
 
I’m going to achieve anything in the future, tomorrow 
onwards?” This question arose in the mind of Arjuna: 
“Is it certain that I will win victory, or will the other 
side win victory? Am I going to conquer the world, or 
will the world conquer me? Is it wisdom on my part to 
face this world, or will I return shamefaced?” This is a 
question which will harass your minds. The other 
question is, “What will be the consequence of my 
having achieved a success in this adventure—even if it 
be a success? If I attain to the heights of spirituality, 
what happens afterwards? What is the consequence? 
What for is this pursuit? If the pursuit of yoga implies a 
disassociation from sense contact, an involvement in 
things of the world, and a restraint upon the usual 
social attitude of the mind—namely, like and dislike, 
etc.—when I restrain myself in this manner, by the 
senses as well as by the mind, I may lose all the values 
and the pleasures of this world. I will have no 
connection with anything, which is tantamount to 
saying that I have lost everything. What is the use of 
going to the kingdom of heaven, even if it be a 
possibility, by losing all the wonders and the beauties 
and the pleasures of life? What am I going to eat in the 
kingdom of heaven, if all things that we have here are to 
be abandoned in the name of God? If all the army of the 
Kauravas is going to be destroyed, and all my kith and 
kin are not to be here, what for is this success even if I 
am going to win victory in this battle? If everybody dies 
in the name of justice, what for is this justice—for 
whose purpose?” 
These questions are justifiable questions that may 
arise in the minds of every seeker. “What happens to 
this world when I reach God?” Even the most intelligent 


===== PAGE 29 / 161 =====

29 
 
person cannot answer this question. Not even the best 
exponent will be able to express himself in answering 
this pose, “What happens to the world when you go to 
God? What happens to your bank balance?” It’s a terror 
to hear that you lose it, and you will get nothing to eat, 
nothing to drink, and nothing to possess—‘pauper of 
the first water’ when you enter the kingdom of God. 
This doubt may harass us, “Is it going to be like this?” 
Even sincere seekers feel many a time, “What am I 
supposed to do after reaching God? I go on looking at 
Him for eternity, by eating nothing, sleeping nowhere, 
and having nothing to do. What a drab kind of life!” This 
is also a very serious point that may arise even in the 
best of us, what to talk about novitiates, because the 
thing you call God is not so easy to understand. It is not 
supposed to be understood at all under the 
circumstances 
we 
are 
placed, 
rationally 
or 
psychologically. 
Hence, now comes a very important conclusion. 
“Under these circumstances of a doubtful background 
of my very idea of taking to this path, I think I have to 
think thrice before taking a step in this direction. I shall 
do nothing; it is enough,” said Arjuna and he threw his 
weapon down, giving up all effort whatsoever in the 
direction of doing what he was expected to do. Now the 
question arises: What is it that you are expected to do, 
which frightens you so much, as it frightened Arjuna? 
The battle that we speak of in the epic is only a 
metaphor; it is an insignia of the conditions of life as a 
whole. Every question is a battle; you have to face it in 
order to answer it. Every moment of our life there is a 
question before us: What am I to do, and in what 
manner have I to do, and for what purpose have I to do, 


===== PAGE 30 / 161 =====

30 
 
etc.? There was a great thinker in the West who wrote a 
large thesis in answer to three questions: What can we 
know, what are we to do, and what can we hope for in 
this world? These are three questions before us, and 
the great thinker wrote three books in answer to these 
three questions. What can we know finally in this 
world, which also implies what we cannot know? What 
are we supposed to do here? What can we expect finally 
here in this world? These are philosophical questions—
you may say spiritual questions—because what you 
have to do as a duty is connected with what you can 
know, and if your knowledge is tarnished by the error 
of a contamination of sense activity, to that extent your 
knowledge of what you have to do in this world also 
will be contaminated. Your idea of duty will be 
inadequate to the extent of your inadequacy of the 
understanding of life itself. So Arjuna did not know 
what he was supposed to do, as he had decided in a 
wrong manner not to do, since to do would mean a 
great suffering to himself as well as to others. To reach 
God, to enter the kingdom of heaven is a suffering to 
you in one way, and also is a suffering to others with 
whom you are related in this world; and you know very 
well why it is and why it should be so.  
This difficulty arises on account of a lack of 
sufficient understanding, and understanding is called 
samkhya in the language of the Bhagavadgita. “Arjuna, 
you have no samkhya-buddhi,” says Sri Krishna. “You 
are unable to discriminate between the real and the 
unreal, the true and the false, which means to say you 
have no right understanding, and samkhya is right 
understanding.” The word ‘samkhya’ is used in the 
Bhagavadgita in a different sense from the way you are 


===== PAGE 31 / 161 =====

31 
 
likely to understand it in the schools of thought. Here 
the samkhya word does not necessarily mean the 
jargon of the traditional school which goes by the name 
of Samkhya, propounded by a sage called Kapila, as one 
of the six systems of thought in India. Though it has 
some connection with what the Bhagavadgita is telling 
us, it is not identical with the meaning of the word 
‘samkhya’ as it is used in the Bhagavadgita. In a general 
way we may say that samkhya means right knowledge. 
It is not easy to have right knowledge when we are not 
having sufficient information regarding things, and the 
information conveyed to us by the senses is not 
ultimately reliable. We cannot wholly rely upon what 
the senses are telling us. Therefore, the knowledge 
which is based on these reports of the senses may not 
be entirely reliable. Hence, our understanding of the 
world may not be regarded as adequate to the purpose. 
Thus it follows that we cannot know what we are 
supposed to do in this world. One cannot know what 
one’s duty is because knowledge of things is based on 
understanding, which we lack, since we are sensorily 
conditioned and not so very rational, purely, as we may 
sometimes imagine ourselves to be. So samkhya was 
not there in the mind of Arjuna; right understanding 
was not coming forth. I am now slowly entering into the 
second chapter of the Bhagavadgita which is called 
Samkhya Yoga. The difficulty, the melancholy, the 
despondency, the fear which was the subject of the first 
chapter arises on account of a lack of samkhya. What is 
samkhya? 
What 
is 
knowledge? 
What 
is 
right 
understanding? Before I touch upon the core of the 
meaning of the term ‘samkhya’ as used in the 
Bhagavadgita, I would give, in a few words, the way in 


===== PAGE 32 / 161 =====

32 
 
which the cosmological principles are described in the 
school going by the name of Samkhya, under the 
authorship of Kapila. As I mentioned, though it has no 
direct relevance to the Bhagavadgita, it would be 
profitable for you to know what it actually means, and 
how it differs from the samkhya of the Bhagavadgita. 
The whole of the Samkhya philosophy is a system of 
cosmology; it is a description of the way in which things 
evolve from the Ultimate Reality. Now I am speaking to 
you the classical Samkhya of Kapila, which is in some 
respects acceptable to the other schools of thought also, 
though not entirely. I will tell you in what way they are 
acceptable and in what way they are not acceptable. 
The Supreme Being is called purusha in the Samkhya. 
The essential nature of this purusha is pure 
consciousness, awareness, brilliance, light, intelligence, 
self-awareness. The purusha is an Infinite Being, and 
not something that is in some place; it is not an 
individual person. Creation takes place by the coming 
in contact, in a novel way, of this pure spirit, purusha, 
consciousness, with cosmic matter, called prakriti. So, 
there are two realities: consciousness and matter—the 
subject and the object, as you sometimes call them. 
When the subject comes in contact with the object, 
there is knowledge of the object. So knowledge is a 
product. Knowledge in the sense of knowledge of 
objects is a product of the coming together of 
consciousness with this principal material-stuff called 
prakriti. It is an indeterminate, all-pervasive principle 
called prakriti; actually the word prakriti in Sanskrit 
means ‘the origin of materiality’. The original ethereal 
form of matter, the finest condition of matter, is called 
prakriti. The natural state of affairs is prakriti. When 


===== PAGE 33 / 161 =====

33 
 
this Infinite Consciousness, purusha, comes in contact 
with the infinite prakriti, there is a consciousness of 
one’s being there as an “I am that I am”. There is no 
consciousness of an individual object outside, because 
it has not yet been manifested—it is to take place 
further on. There is a universal feeling of “I am”—so, 
the feeling “I am”, even in universal sense, is a step 
down in the process of creation, while the pure purusha 
is not even an “I am”. It is something more than that—
indescribable ‘That Which Is’. This cosmic “I am” is, in 
its general form, called mahat; and in a more 
particularised, emphasised form is called ahamkara. So, 
we have purusha, prakriti, mahat, and ahamkara. These 
are cosmical levels. 
Now, you have to listen to me more carefully, 
because something happens—the real creation starts 
now 
onwards. 
This 
concretised, 
universal 
self-
consciousness, known as ahamkara, is split into the 
objective side and the subjective side by some miracle 
of the creative will. Thus it is that we are seeing a world 
outside, as if it is totally external. Space and time 
introduce themselves. So, the first conceivable form of 
the world may be said to be what you call ‘space and 
time’, or in modern language you may say ‘space-time 
complex’. It is a condition of further creation. There 
cannot be creation unless there is space-time; it is an 
antecedent to every concept of evolution in any manner 
whatsoever. When space-time is manifest or evolved by 
the will, as you may say of this cosmic self-
consciousness, 
ahamkara, 
there 
is 
a 
further 
condensation into greater grossness, into more 
concrete vibrations which you call sensations of sound, 
of touch, of colour, of taste, and of smell. These 


===== PAGE 34 / 161 =====

34 
 
principles which are behind these five sensations are 
called tanmatras in the Sanskrit language. A word used 
in 
Sanskrit, 
tanmatra, 
means 
the 
fundamental 
characteristic of all things in this world. Basically they 
are only sensations, which is what modern science also 
is telling us finally—the whole world is nothing but a 
huge bundle of sensations. The solidity is not the truth 
of things. 
Now, there is a further condensation by a mixing up 
of these cosmical principles called tanmatras in certain 
proportions, and as a mixture is produced by an 
apothecary or a doctor by combining chemical products 
in some proportion and it becomes a medical mixture; 
in such a way or in some such manner these principles, 
these tanmatras, got combined and became gross 
elements in what are called ether, air, fire, water, and 
earth. These five gross elements are the whole world. In 
this world you will see nothing except these five 
elements—ether, air, fire, water, earth. Even this 
physical body of ours and everything that is physical 
and material in this world, all these are constituted of 
these five elements only. Here is the objective world 
before us, according to the Samkhya cosmological 
evolutionary process. 
Subjectively, we are individuals looking at the 
world. We—not merely humans, everything that is 
capable of visualising the world as an external 
something—is a subject, even if it be subhuman or even 
superhuman. As this cosmical outward world is 
constituted in this manner described, the individual 
also is constituted in some way. The physical body of 
organic as well as inorganic beings is made up of the 
same five elements—earth, water, fire, air, and ether. 


===== PAGE 35 / 161 =====

35 
 
But inside the body there are other things, deeper 
layers, internal and more pervasive, more ethereal—
like electric energy you may say—than the physical 
body outside. We have the pranas inside. A prana is a 
vibratory motion of an energy which sustains us, and 
due to which we feel strength in our system. Internal to 
the pranas is the mind, which thinks. The senses—
hearing, seeing, etc.—are intermediary operations 
between the prana and the mind. They are connecting 
links between the prana and the mind; they can be 
associated with the prana or associated with the mind 
as you like, or perhaps both. But internal to the mind is 
understanding or the intellect, the reason which does 
not merely think in an indeterminate manner but 
determinately decides, judges, understands, and comes 
to a conclusion; that is reason—intellect. These layers 
mentioned are called, in Sanskrit, the koshas. Kosha 
means a cover, an investiture, an encasement. The 
physical body is called annamaya kosha because it is 
actually made up of the stuff of food that is taken inside. 
The pranas are called the pranamaya kosha. Internally 
we have got the manomaya kosha or the mind, then the 
vijnanamaya kosha or the intellect. Then there is a fifth 
one which is a causal condition, you call sometimes the 
unconscious level in psychology. It is something more 
than what you call the unconscious in ordinary 
psychology—it is the repository of all the conditions 
necessary for further reincarnations, into which you 
descend in deep sleep. Beyond that is the Atman, the 
pure spirit which is illuminating everything, whose 
reflection it is that is enabling the intellect to 
understand. So this is the subjective side, we may say—
the subjective world. 


===== PAGE 36 / 161 =====

36 
 
The operation of this subjective world through the 
instrument of the mind, the intellect, and the senses, in 
contact with the objective world described, is what we 
call human experience as far as we are concerned. All of 
our experiences, desirable or undesirable, are the 
outcome of a peculiar coming in contact of the 
subjective world with the objective world. The reason 
behind this contact, and the nature of this contact was 
not clear to the mind of Arjuna, and is not clear to the 
mind of any one of us. This knowledge is called 
samkhya—right understanding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 37 / 161 =====

37 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
SAMKHYA—RIGHT UNDERSTANDING 
The second chapter of the Bhagavadgita deals with 
what is known as Samkhya Yoga, which is the yoga of 
understanding—an understanding which was not 
adequately present in the mind of Arjuna at the time 
when he was very much confused as to the duty to 
which he was obliged under the circumstance in which 
he was placed. 
One cannot know what one has to do unless one’s 
position in this world is known to one’s self. Your duty, 
your attitude, the functions that you have to perform—
all these are determined by the location of your 
personality in a given atmosphere. Thus, the concept of 
duty may be regarded as something relative, and not 
absolute. You cannot prescribe one particular function 
as the duty of a person forever and ever till eternity. 
The person we are speaking of, or referring to, is to a 
large extent identical with what we would call the 
‘individual’—the so-called ‘me’, ‘you’, etc. Our duty in 
this world, what the world expects from us, is 
dependent upon what we are, what we know, what we 
are capable of—and again, all these things depend upon 
where we are placed. 
Last time, I tried to state briefly the outline of the 
cosmological process described in the Samkhya 
philosophy, to which reference is made in the 
Bhagavadgita. The study of cosmology is an important 
part of philosophical studies, because there are levels of 


===== PAGE 38 / 161 =====

38 
 
understanding, and, at least from the point of view of 
one level in which the understanding operates, there 
seems to be a gradational relationship obtaining 
between the individual and his environment. I am using 
the word ‘environment’ purposely, suggesting that it is 
what you consider to be around you, though there may 
be other things around you whose existence may not be 
known to you, of which you may not be aware, though 
they may be there. People complain of the atmosphere, 
environment, etc., sometimes by limiting the concept of 
this environment to sociological or social conditions in 
life mostly, though the environment in which we are 
living is not necessarily restricted to human society. We 
are living in human society no doubt, but we are living 
also in a larger atmosphere than can be covered or even 
conceived by human society. 
One of the problems that arose in the mind of Arjuna 
was the limiting of his notions to his social relations, 
which means to say, the relations with other people. 
Mostly, perhaps always, we are likely to think only in 
terms of other people in this world, which is called 
‘sociological thinking’. It appears from this limited view 
of thinking that the world consists of nothing but 
human beings; there is nothing anywhere in all creation 
except men and women—human beings. If it is true 
that we are mostly concerned with human affairs, and 
perhaps we are not concerned with any other affair 
anywhere, this was a question which troubled the mind 
of Arjuna and troubles the mind of everybody, even this 
moment here. But the ‘world’, using this word in a very, 
very large, expanded form of its meaning, is not 
exhausted by humanity only. Science, which is mostly 
physical, chemical and biological, has tried to lift the 


===== PAGE 39 / 161 =====

39 
 
conceptualisations of mankind beyond mere political 
and sociological thinking, and demonstrated before 
man that there are laws and powers and systems of 
operation which cannot be exhausted by politics and 
sociology. The life on earth is not completely decided by 
what other people are thinking, or all people are 
thinking. The life of the earth, or life in general, is vaster 
than the concept you call political, social, communal—
or, in any sense of the term, social. But there is a defect 
which infects human nature and infects every species 
you may say, dragging it to the level of that species 
only, and it cannot think in terms of any other species 
of existence—neither we are bothered about subhuman 
existences, nor superhuman levels of being. Let 
anything happen in the angel’s kingdom, we are not 
bothered; we are also not worried about what 
happened in jungles, or in areas where humanity does 
not reside. 
This is not a charitable way of thinking, to put it very 
politely. Even to be a little good, and charitable in our 
feelings, we must be considerate enough to accept that 
the world contains more things than man. However, the 
effect or the impact of human relationship upon the 
human mind is such that it will not permit the 
operation of higher laws in the present state of human 
thinking. This was the point made out by Bhagavan Sri 
Krishna when he said, “Arjuna, you lack samkhya—
right understanding.” From the point of view of a 
philosopher of history or a metaphysician of the 
process of human history, a pure political reading of 
human affairs may look merely puerile and almost 
childish. The process of human history is not the 
coming and going of kings and queens, or the wars that 


===== PAGE 40 / 161 =====

40 
 
are waged, the births and deaths of people—this is not 
human history, from the point of view of a deeper study 
of the very process that underlies the current you call 
‘human evolution through history’. Likewise, from the 
point of view of an astronomer and a physicist, or even 
a scientist of any nature, political thinking will look 
very poor. It is not to the point, because the world is 
guided by forces which are not necessarily political or 
sociological. 
Now, we are lifted to a higher level of thinking when 
the word ‘samkhya’ is used in the second chapter of the 
Bhagavadgita, meaning thereby an understanding of 
the true relationship that obtains between you and 
everything that is around you, and not merely that 
which appears to be around you. Though it may appear 
that there is nothing around you except people to 
whom you are concerned positively or negatively, by 
means of like and dislike, etc., there are more important 
things that condition our existence than the existence 
of other people like us. This was revealed to us to some 
extent by our study of the cosmology of the Samkhya. 
The very existence of human beings as individuals or 
isolated personalities is due to an event that has 
perhaps taken place in the process of the creational or 
the evolutionary activity of the whole structure of the 
universe. 
You may have to remember what I told you last 
time; I need not repeat it once again. The individuality, 
the so-called ‘me’, is the subjective side that has arisen 
as a result of the split of the cosmic ahamkara—these 
terms 
you 
may 
remember 
for 
purpose 
of 
understanding what is going to follow further on. A 
cosmic self-consciousness is called ahamkara—not the 


===== PAGE 41 / 161 =====

41 
 
ahamkara or the ego of man, but an impersonal 
metaphysical reality, which is the “I Am What I Am” of 
mysticism and religion that manifested itself, as it were, 
as the objective universe of perception and the 
subjective individuality which are the jivas, in the 
Sanskrit language. That which beholds the world as 
something outside is the jiva or the individual; it may 
be human or even superhuman, or otherwise. That 
which looks at the world as an external something is 
called the jiva. This jiva, this individual, is constituted of 
certain building bricks, which I narrated last time as the 
bodily structure of five elements: earth, water, fire, air, 
ether; and the internal components: the pranas, the 
senses, the mind, the intellect and the large reservoir of 
what we call the ‘unconscious’ in the English language, 
but something larger than what the psychologists call 
‘unconscious’—the 
potentiality 
of 
every 
future 
eventuality, and even rebirth, that is there at the root of 
our individuality. Transcendent to all these layers of 
our individuality is the ‘Light Supernal’ which is the 
Absolute peeping through our reason, through our 
mind and even the senses, and animating every cell of 
our body, making us feel “We are”, “I am”, etc. 
Now, the second chapter and the third chapter have 
some sort of relationship from the point of view of the 
theme discussed. It is merely pointed out in the second 
chapter that right understanding is necessary, and only 
an introductory remark is made as to what samkhya 
means, so far as the second chapter goes. Right from 
the beginning till the end of the second chapter, the 
word samkhya is used in many, many places, suggesting 
that samkhya is the knowledge of the harmony that is 
there among all things—samatva—the equanimous, 


===== PAGE 42 / 161 =====

42 
 
organisational, cooperative feature operating between 
one and another, thus cementing all particularities or 
individuals into a sort of cosmic organisation or 
universal society. This is the suggestion of the second 
chapter when it says: Samatvaṁ yoga ucyate (Gita 
2.48): Equanimity is yoga, balance is yoga, harmony is 
yoga, cooperation is yoga—not competition, not battle, 
not war, not exploitation, not animosity, not hatred. 
Also, a very subtle and potent, meaningful word is used 
in the very same chapter, connecting this principle of 
harmony or equanimity operating in all creation with 
the duties of man in the world, when it says yogaḥ 
karmasu kauśalam (2.50): Yoga is expertness in action. 
This is a very pithy statement; no commentary is given 
here. We are not told as to what this expertness means, 
though we may impliedly take it to mean that harmony 
or balance of attitude should be the pre-condition of 
any kind of adventure or project in life. Every activity 
should be conditioned by a poised nature of the mind. 
You should not enter into activity of any kind with 
disturbed emotions or an axe to grind; there should be 
no selfishness. The words ‘samatva’ and ‘kausala’, used 
in the second chapter of the Gita, exhaust, perhaps, 
what the Gita intends to tell us. But they are so difficult 
to understand because the word used is very subtle in 
its connotation, though we can extract lot of meaning 
from it by going into the context in which it is used. The 
necessity for maintaining a balanced attitude in mind, 
in our general attitude, while we perform works 
expertly, arises because of the fact of our location in 
this universe, which will devolve automatically from 
your knowledge of the very nature of our individuality 
in the light of the cosmological process described. 


===== PAGE 43 / 161 =====

43 
 
The world is not disassociated from us, because 
originally we were all united in the Cosmic Self—the 
universal ahamkara. The world is not an object of the 
senses, truly speaking. Thus, the reports of the senses 
may not be considered as a final, reliable information 
given to us. There is an error sometimes involved 
mostly in sense perception, because there is an 
insistence on the part of the senses to consider the 
world as a total foreigner, without which concept we 
cannot deal with things in the way we are doing now in 
our daily life. We are suspicious of the world. Here is 
the root of all our troubles. We are afraid of the world, 
and our loves and hatreds for things of the world, 
including persons, are explainable only on the basis of 
our erroneous concept that the world is not vitally 
connected with us. It is not possible to hug onto, or 
crave for any object which is vitally, organically related 
to me, nor can I hate it for the same reason. Loves and 
hatreds in life seem to be out of point, totally, in the 
light of an understanding of our position, as we know, 
from a study of the cosmological process. There is lot of 
teaching in the religions of the world that love and 
hatred are not good things. Desire is not right—it is an 
improper attitude of the mind. Everyone says this, in all 
religions and philosophies. But why is desire bad? Why 
are loves and hatreds not considered as proper on our 
part? Because this attitude of like and dislike, love and 
hatred, implies a total misconception of our connection 
with the world. So, in a way we may say that our 
political philosophies, as they are working today at 
least, though they may not be always so, and our social 
concepts are totally misplaced, which perhaps explains 
the turmoil we are passing through in our lives, and the 


===== PAGE 44 / 161 =====

44 
 
troubles of our psyche, the sorrows of our existence, 
and the insecurities we are facing from moment to 
moment. This was troubling Arjuna, and we are the 
same Arjuna seated here today, in the field of the 
Mahabharata of this world where Sri Krishna has to 
come to guide us—which is nothing but the Light of 
God, the Light of the World. 
Now, without going in large details of everything 
that is told us in the second chapter, I will take your 
mind to the true meaning of this samkhya, which 
perhaps was in the mind of Sri Krishna when he used 
this word for rectifying the erroneous thinking of 
Arjuna. 
“What 
do 
you 
mean 
by 
this 
right 
understanding? I cannot know what you are speaking,” 
cried out Arjuna at the beginning of the third chapter. 
“You have confused me completely by telling so many 
things, nothing of which is clear to me.” Here is a 
troubled mind speaking once again, at the very 
beginning of the commencement of the third chapter. 
“Is my relationship to the world a total unity, in which 
case I have to do nothing? Or, is it total separation, in 
which case also I have to do nothing? The question of 
duty does not arise in this world if I have a relationship 
which is totally organic or totally isolated. So my mind 
is confused about what you are speaking. Be more 
explicit, please,” so speaks Arjuna. “What is it that you 
are expecting me to do by asking me to have samkhya, 
right understanding, poised mind, calm attitude, 
expertness in action? I cannot understand the meaning 
behind these terms you are using.”  
The third chapter is a very important section of the 
Bhagavadgita. It is perhaps the whole gospel of human 
action. There are certain chapters which sum up the 


===== PAGE 45 / 161 =====

45 
 
very principles of the entire teaching of the 
Bhagavadgita, one of them being the third chapter. 
There is no necessity for me to dilate upon this theme 
in a very large measure inasmuch as I endeavoured to 
explain this theme of the third chapter in some detail in 
an earlier discourse I gave, and which has been printed 
fortunately, and it is available for you in the text called 
The Philosophy of the Bhagavadgita. It is a larger series 
of lectures than the one I am giving you now, so I don’t 
think you will be at a loss if I am a little brief in my 
discourses here, especially as we have to conclude by 
next month, and also because there is already 
something that I have told on this theme in the form of 
a ready textbook. The third chapter of the Bhagavadgita 
is called Karma Yoga—the yoga of right action, or 
action as such in the light of correct understanding. 
Now, again I come to the point of cosmology, which 
explains our relationship with the world with 
everything that is around us. From this narration of the 
story of the descent of man from the higher realms, 
right from mahat and ahamkara, we learn that our 
personality—this individuality—is constitutionally not 
separate from the structure of the world or the 
universe outside. The substance out of which our 
individuality is made is not different from the 
substance of which the world outside is made. Bring 
back to your memories these principles of descent I 
mentioned to you—I will repeat it once again if you 
have not been able to note down these. There is the 
mulaprakriti, the original material out of which the 
whole cosmos was formed, something like the space-
time of modern physics—or something subtler even 
than that—from which descended the tanmatras: 


===== PAGE 46 / 161 =====

46 
 
sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa, gandha—the principles of 
sound, touch, colour, taste and smell, which concretised 
themselves into a greater density of substance by a sort 
of permutation and combination, and became the solid 
substances you see here as the five elements: earth, 
water, fire, air and ether. These things are the building 
bricks of the cosmos, physically speaking—everything 
material is nothing but a formation of the five elements: 
earth, water, fire, air, ether—this body, this building, 
this tree, this everything. 
Now, here is an introduction given to right 
understanding. The mulaprakriti that I mentioned is 
constituted of three forces called sattva, rajas and 
tamas. We have heard in modern science words like ‘ 
statics’ and ‘kinetics’, ‘inertia’ and ‘action’. What you 
call ‘ statics’ is something like inertia; we may equate it 
with 
tamas, 
non-action—and 
kinetics 
is 
rajas, 
movement, distraction, etc. But there is no such thing as 
sattva in the scientific language of modern times. There 
is either statics or kinetics—there is nothing else. But 
there is a third thing which is the balancing of the two. 
That is called sattva in the language of Indian 
philosophy; the condition of true being is called sattva. 
In Sanskrit, ‘sat’ means existence, being; and the 
condition of being is called sattva. The characteristic of 
being is sattva, and the characteristic of being is 
equanimity—not isolation, distraction and separation. 
So, the nature of reality or true being is neither inert 
existence and loss or absence of consciousness, nor is it 
activity in the sense of distraction. Pure being, 
sattvaguna, is not rajas; it is not also tamas. This sattva 
is a power that connects the two extremes of inertia 
and activity—rajas and tamas; and the whole of the 


===== PAGE 47 / 161 =====

47 
 
world is nothing but this threefold activity of nature—
sattva, rajas and tamas—which is the structure, the 
constitution, the basic substance of the tanmatras, the 
five elements, this body, and all things in the world. 
This means that our body, this prana, the senses, the 
mind, the intellect, etc. are all somehow or the other 
manufactured, in some way, by an admixture of these 
forces—sattva, rajas, and tamas in some proportion—
and by another admixture, in another way, the world 
outside is made. We are made as the final substance, as 
subjects, as individuals perceiving the world, identical 
with the substance of the world outside. When the 
senses perceive the world, the gunas move among 
gunas, prakriti contacts prakriti—it is the right hand 
touching the left hand, as it were, of the same body, 
perhaps more intimately and vitally than merely a 
contact of one limb of the body with another limb of the 
body. In the third chapter, this point is brought out. In 
all perception, the individual is not contacting a foreign 
element like the world outside, but ‘one’s own mother’ 
is embraced by the child—not an ordinary embrace but 
a longing for union with ‘That’ from which it has been 
isolated, from which it has fallen. So, in all sense-
perception there is an internal craving to unite with 
things on account of the fact being that the substance of 
the perceiver is the same as the substance of that which 
is perceived—so there is a philosophy behind desire, 
and there is also an error involved in the desire. 
The justification and the philosophical implication of 
the manifestation or the working of human desire in 
the form of sense activity and perception is that we are 
basically one with all things. This is the reason we are 
impetuously pulled in the direction of the things of the 


===== PAGE 48 / 161 =====

48 
 
world. The error of our desires is that they insist on 
convincing themselves that the world is a foreigner, it is 
outside. There is a double activity going on in our mind 
in every perception. On the one hand, a love for things 
is impossible unless we are united with things. You 
cannot desire a thing which is totally isolated from you. 
All desire implies a basic unity with all things, and also 
at the same time, all desire implies that the world is 
outside of oneself. Thus every desire is a contradiction, 
a psychic schizophrenia in a philosophical sense at 
least. There is a morbidity, there is an un-justification 
finally, an inscrutability in the activity of every desire 
which acts on one side as an indication of the basic 
unity of things, and on the other side performs the 
opposite function of insisting on the duality, the 
separation, and the isolation of the subject from the 
object. So we are living in a world of contradiction, 
psychologically speaking, and every desire is a psychic 
contradiction. This is the reason why great questions of 
life cannot be answered by an intellect which is 
subservient to the emotions, which again work in the 
light of the knowledge received through the senses, 
which, to repeat again, are not reliable for reasons 
already mentioned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 49 / 161 =====

49 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
DUTY—AN EMPIRICAL MANIFESTATION OF TRUE 
BEING 
The study that has been conducted up to this time 
concerning the teaching of the Bhagavadgita would 
have revealed to us that we are born with a duty, and 
we can never be free from some duty or the other. It 
also implies that we have no rights; we have only 
duties, contrary to what one would expect from the 
point of view of common human nature. The fight for 
rights is out of point in a world of duties, which is 
inescapable under the set-up of things. The duty that 
we owe to ourselves, as well as anything that is around 
us, is a necessary conclusion that follows from the 
nature of our relationship with things in general. The 
connection that obtains between us and the world at 
large is such that there is a mutual obligation, as it 
were, between ourselves and the world. This obligation 
is not a compulsion, but a necessary conclusion 
automatically following from the essential character of 
Being itself. Thus duty is an empirical manifestation of 
true being. Here is the sum and substance of the great 
gospel. 
Our organic relationship with things is the reason 
behind the duty that we owe to things, and this also is 
the reason why we need not expect any fruit from the 
duty that we perform in respect of anyone or anything. 
To expect a fruit is a mistake. Mā phaleṣu kadācana, mā 
karmaphalahetur bhūr mā te saṅgo’stvakarmaṇi (Gita 


===== PAGE 50 / 161 =====

50 
 
2.47): You have a duty, you have an obligation to do, 
but you have no right to expect a particular 
consequence or result or fruit to follow from what you 
do. This is a very difficult, pithy enunciation in the 
Bhagavadgita—that we have duties but we cannot 
expect any fruits from the duties that we perform. 
This may look very odd and unpleasant to the selfish 
individual, but as I have tried to mention earlier, the 
law of the universe is not necessarily a pleasant dish 
that is served to the ego of man; it is a principle that 
operates, and it is neither pleasant nor unpleasant. Its 
reactions, under given conditions of personality, appear 
to be pleasant or otherwise. The duty that we owe to 
anyone or anything is the homage that we pay to the 
vastness of the atmosphere in which we are placed, and 
the grandeur of the relationship that is there between 
us and the whole of creation. There is a majesty ruling 
the whole cosmos; and it is this superabundance of 
magnificence, which is the law of the universe, that 
inexorably operates and impartially dispenses justice 
without any favour or disfavour in regard to any person 
or thing. 
It is difficult to understand what all this means if we 
study this theme merely as an abstract science of 
logical philosophy. Perhaps I may place before you an 
analogy or a comparison that is more concrete and 
visible to our eyes than this pure abstract principle we 
are discussing in this context. We owe a duty to the 
body in which we are enshrined, and every part of the 
body owes a duty to every other part of the body, but 
no part of the body has a right over another part. This is 
something very novel that we see in the physiological 
organism of our own personality. Every limb of our 


===== PAGE 51 / 161 =====

51 
 
body has a duty which it automatically performs 
without compulsion or impulsion, without any mandate 
or governmental enactment; yet, it does not expect 
anything 
from 
that 
particular 
limb 
to 
which 
cooperation is extended. If the stomach eats the food, 
the teeth, which have merely munched it and got 
nothing out of it, do not complain; and so on, with every 
other part of the body, there is an excessively friendly 
cooperation. ‘Friendliness’ is a poor word we are using 
to describe this immense unity of purpose that obtains 
between the limbs of our body. It is oneness in the 
midst of diversity of the organisational set-up. There is 
no expectation on the part of a limb of the body in 
respect of another limb, because the fruit that it might 
expect automatically follows from the duty that it 
performs. The privilege that you expect in this world, 
the right that you are craving for after performing a 
duty, is something which you need not expect—it will 
follow. When the sun rises, there will be light. Likewise 
whatever you need, which is called your expectation or 
the fruit so-called, will follow spontaneously from the 
very fact of your having performed your duty. You need 
not ask for the fruits; they shall drop from the skies, 
even without your asking for them. And we will be told 
sometime later in the Bhagavadgita that when one is 
united with the purpose of the whole creation, he shall 
be taken care of by the very law of the universe, and 
need not cry, “Let it come.” Ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye 
janāḥ 
paryupāsate, 
teṣāṁ 
nityābhiyuktānāṁ 
yogakṣemaṁ vahāmyaham (Gita 9.22)—is a great 
pendent hanging in the garland of the verses of the 
Bhagavadgita as a central gospel. God, the universe, the 
law, whatever you may call it, shall protect you and 


===== PAGE 52 / 161 =====

52 
 
take care of you more than a mother can do—provided 
you have that affection which you expect from the 
world. 
Thus it is that we cannot expect any fruit of our 
actions, because our actions are duties that we owe and 
are not something grudgingly that we do under 
compulsion from outside. There is no ‘outside’ in this 
world. You have to listen to every sentence that I 
uttered last time and earlier; otherwise, I may not be 
able to repeat the same thing again and again because 
we have to cover a large area of study within a short 
time. The debts that we owe to things, if we would like 
to call them debts, are the same as the duties that we 
have to perform. It is the acceptance of an organic 
connection between ourselves and all things. It is the 
cooperation that follows from the very structure of 
creation. There is no competition possible; it is a word 
which has no sense under the sun—there is no such 
thing as that. There is only cooperation; there cannot be 
competition in this world. One cannot vie with the 
other, because there is no ‘other’ in this world. This will 
be made more clear as we move further on from the 
chapters of the Bhagavadgita, how there is no other. 
Your neighbour is an extended form of your own self—
so the service that you render to your neighbour, which 
is the whole world outside you, is a service that you 
finally render to your own larger existence. This you 
will know further as you go deeper. This much about 
the verse: karmaṇyevādhikāras te mā phaleṣu kadācana 
(Gita 2.47)—Don’t expect fruits. 
Secondly, while you have to perform duty, the 
nature of the consequence that follows from the 
performance of duty is not clear to your mind. So to 


===== PAGE 53 / 161 =====

53 
 
expect a particular result to follow from a particular 
action would be like a blind man groping in the dark 
and catching hold of what he does not know is there. 
While under the given circumstance of your existence 
you have an obligation towards things, which has to be 
clear to your mind, you cannot clearly perceive the 
result that will follow from that action because results 
are conditioned by infinite factors, not necessarily the 
thing that you do from the point of view of your limited 
understanding. There are other factors which condition 
things. Again, we shall revert to this theme as we go 
further towards the chapters that are to come. 
You can sow the seed in a field and expect a harvest. 
In a way, you may be justified in expecting a large 
harvest to follow the fact of your sowing a seed, putting 
the manure, watering it, fencing it, guarding it. But do 
you believe that this is the only thing that determines 
the harvest? There are other conditions necessary for 
the harvest to be reaped apart from your tending it, and 
apart from all that you have done for it—the rainfall, 
the seasons, and the other natural conditions necessary 
may be greater conditioning factors than your need to 
sow the seed and pour manure and water into it; and 
many other invisible factors also are involved. Because 
we are not omniscient, we cannot know all the things in 
the world, we cannot know what result will follow from 
what action. Hence, it is not proper on the part of the 
person to expect a particular fruit from any action 
because the fruit is not in your hands, while the duty is 
your obligation. You can present a case before a court, 
but you cannot decide the case yourself—that has to be 
done by the judge. If you already decided the case, there 
is no need of presenting the case at all. So, the 


===== PAGE 54 / 161 =====

54 
 
performance of duty is something like presenting a 
case, and the judgment is not in your hands, so don’t 
expect the fruits. 
“Knowing all this, how is that we seem to be 
sorrowful, bereaved, and not satisfied? Why is it, O 
Krishna?” Thus, the question is raised by Arjuna. “I 
understand what you say, but still I am very unhappy. 
Man is driven to the wrong, he always performs what is 
not good for him—he perpetrates error. Even though 
one can understand what you are saying, what is the 
reason?” Kāma eṣa krodha eṣa rajoguṇa samudbhavaḥ, 
mahāśano mahāpāpmā viddhyenam iha vairiṇam (Gita 
3.37): The enemy of man is his own inner instinctive 
impulsions. There are instincts that are emotional in 
nature, impulsions which are sometimes overwhelming 
and impetuous in their action. They can even confound 
the intellect and the reason of man. When a passion 
preponderates, reason subsides; the intellect will not 
work when the emotions are too strong. A man 
perpetuates offences though he knows that there is a 
law which will not permit the perpetration of this act. A 
person who does wrong under normal conditions 
knows that such an action is wrong. But when a person 
is in height of passion, he is not a normal person—the 
normalcy is absent there. He becomes a temporary ‘out 
of gear individual’ who has lost the common sense that 
is required of a normal human individual. Like a flood 
that can devastate villages and destroy people, 
emotions can rise under given conditions. Then law 
does not operate, because one cannot be even aware 
that such a thing as law exists. A person may be hanged 
for an acute offence due to the operation of a law. It 
does not mean that the person is unaware of the 


===== PAGE 55 / 161 =====

55 
 
existence of such a law, but at that particular moment 
he becomes unaware of it because reason fails. So, 
while the reason is a great guide indeed, perhaps the 
only guide that you have, it can get deflected out of its 
normal course by the vehemence of the flood of 
emotion which is the impulsion behind the feelings, 
which can gain an upper hand. These feelings, which 
are purely personal, selfish and would not take into 
consideration even the existence of other people, these 
emotions are called kama, krodha, lobha. 
Kama is a very wide word, with a meaning which is 
capable of covering every form of longing. When desire 
intensifies itself, we call it passion. In Sanskrit we have 
many words indicating the same meaning: raga, kama, 
etc. An intense longing for something, an intense 
craving to do something, a yearning to possess 
something in an overwhelmingly powerful manner, is a 
passion—a kama, a raga. Any obstacle in the direction 
of the fulfilment of this passion becomes the target of 
anger of that person. Krodha follows therefore, as a 
brother of kama—and when one is, the other one also 
is. These impulsions are the products or the results of a 
very active manifestation of rajoguna—rajas—that is 
present in human personality, and no one can subdue 
them, 
normally 
speaking. 
A 
higher 
meditative 
technique may have to be employed, and there is no 
other recipe for this illness of man. The meditational 
technique that is very, very precisely stated in only a 
few words towards the end of the third chapter is to be 
dilated upon further on when we go to the fourth, fifth 
and sixth chapters, indicating thereby the lower can be 
controlled only by resort to the higher. You cannot 
employ lower means to restrain these lower impulses. 


===== PAGE 56 / 161 =====

56 
 
Only a greater force can control a lower force. The 
reason has to be trained, for a long time, in carrying on 
correct judgment of things, so that the emotions may 
not preponderate and take advantage of the position 
when the reason is out of guard sometimes.  
The Bhagavadgita will tell us in a half-sentence, as it 
were, towards the end of the third chapter, that the 
final panacea for this great illness of man is only refuge 
to the great Atman or the Self that transcends even the 
reason of man. This is like a theorem that is being 
stated, whose explanations have to be provided for a 
little later. Yet, man seems to be helpless. There is a 
subtle feeling in every one of us that in spite of this 
glorious teaching, we seem to be somehow helpless, in 
some mysterious manner, and we cannot entirely be 
confident that we can be successful in this great 
adventure of the putting into daily action of this 
philosophical principle. 
There is a subtle weakness in man which speaks in 
its own language, and whispers in a tone which is 
distressing at moments. “After all, you puny fellow, you 
cannot achieve this glorious, cosmical success. Though 
it may be true that there is some heritage in you, at the 
present moment all this is like a phantasm, and you 
should not be under the impression that you have the 
strength in you to face the storm that the world may 
kick up when you actually tread the path of the spirit.” 
And each one knows one’s own weaknesses; each one 
knows to what extent one can understand things; each 
one knows one’s own strength, capacity—but, each one 
knows also one’s own weaknesses. Oftentimes, the 
weaknesses may outbalance our strengths. This is a 
suspicion that may be in our minds, and “Doubts are 


===== PAGE 57 / 161 =====

57 
 
our traitors,” says the poet. The traitor in us is the 
doubt that we are incapable of achieving this perhaps—
there is perhaps something due to which we cannot 
achieve success in this path. Though we may not know 
what is the reason behind this feeling, that feeling is 
there, and the feeling has a reason of its own which 
reason cannot know. “Whatever you may say, I have 
something to say, finally, and this is this.” This is very 
unfortunate. This doubt may arise in the mind of Arjuna 
that, “After all, I think I’m not for this.” Many seekers, 
ardent students of yoga, may receive a setback in their 
practice, and receive such a blow from outward society 
and nature and even the physical personality of one’s 
own, by illness or other conditions, that one may be 
disappointed to the core and throw the bow and arrow 
down—“This is not for me,” as Arjuna did. All these 
tools and implements that you have gathered for the 
practice of yoga psychologically will be cast aside. “I’m 
fed up. I’ve done so much, but I’ve achieved nothing.” 
Let this doubt not enter your mind! “O, ye of little faith,” 
says Christ, “if you have faith as much as the size of a 
mustard seed, tell this mountain to move and it shall be 
cast into the ocean, but have faith at least as the size of 
a mustard seed.” This is the great solacing message of 
Christ; and Krishna said the same thing many, many 
centuries back, before Christ was born. This was told us 
that confidence is that which will pave the way to 
success. Never say that “I am unfit.” Why should you 
not be fit? “What one has achieved others also can 
achieve,” is a sentence often repeated by Swami 
Sivanandaji Maharaj. If one Shankaracharaya could 
have achieved that, why not you? In what way are you 
less? “If there was one successful adept, why should I 


===== PAGE 58 / 161 =====

58 
 
not be successful? If he has succeeded, why I should not 
succeed? If he could overcome all the obstacles, why 
should I not?”  
This solacing message of hope, and not of 
despondency, is accentuated and re-enforced at the 
commencement of the fourth chapter, where the Lord 
declares Himself as ready to help anyone, at any 
moment of time, by an incarnation that He will take, 
into which He will descend instantaneously, because 
God is instantaneous existence and He does not take 
time to incarnate Himself. What can be more solacing to 
us than this message—that God can be at your beck and 
call; if you call Him just now, He is there. “Do you think 
that God cannot send an army of angels to protect me, if 
only I ask,” said Christ, when Peter cut the ear of a 
priest who was all ready to arrest Jesus Christ. “If I ask 
merely, an army of angels will descend to protect me, 
do you know? But I don’t ask,” said Christ. 
In the same manner, even without your asking 
perhaps, angels are ready to protect you. The Yoga 
Vasishtha says in one place, “The gods shall take care of 
you, as they are protecting the corners of the world, if 
only you are friendly with them. It is the duty of the 
angels and the celestials in heaven to guard you from 
moment to moment and they shall do it, without fail, in 
the same manner as the planets are moving around the 
sun, the world is being taken care of—why not you? 
Look at the lilies in the fields and the sparrows that fly 
who are taken care of by God. Are you less than they?” 
These are great solaces to man, indeed. Yadā yadā hi 
dharmasya glānir bhavati bhārata abhyutthānam 
adharmasya tadātmānaṁ sṛjāmyaham (Gita 4.7). These 
words are to be written in golden script in the history 


===== PAGE 59 / 161 =====

59 
 
of the spiritual adventure of man. Why should you 
weep and cry? Is God dead? He can never die! He is an 
omnipresent succour! He is alive and awake with 
infinite eyes! There should be no occasion for grief on 
the part of man! “Here I am to render service to you, 
and shall take care of you ever!” The protecting hands 
of God are moving more powerfully than all the evils 
that can be conceived in this world. All the mountains 
of error, blunder, corruption and sin that you can think 
of in this world can be set at naught by the power of 
God’s majesty, and when the sun rises, the thickest 
darkness cannot stand before it. Such is the power of 
the Almighty. So, this is another reinforcing factor 
behind the message that man is bound to succeed in the 
end. “He is heir apparent to the throne of immortality,” 
to put it in the language of Gurudev Swami Sivanandaji 
Maharaj. You are all heirs apparent to the throne of 
immortality, and heir apparent cannot lose his heritage. 
A prince is to be a king one day or the other. This is 
very comforting. We feel healed-up at once—our 
wounds are no more there. The cuts have been healed 
and our sorrows seem to be departing gradually, as the 
night recedes when the sun rises. 
Now I revert for a few minutes to what I told you a 
little earlier—that we are born with a duty, perhaps we 
die with a duty. We need not be frightened about the 
word ‘duty’, as we might be, due to a mistaken 
understanding of the meaning of the word ‘duty’. This is 
the reason why we are asking for privileges and rights 
rather than be willing to do our obligation to others, or 
do our duties. We have created a feeling in our minds 
that a duty is something imposed up on us by others. 
“This is something which I will not do if I am entirely 


===== PAGE 60 / 161 =====

60 
 
free.” But you cannot be entirely free until you do your 
duty—here is the answer to your question. Don’t say, “I 
shall not do anything if I am totally free.” That freedom 
cannot be bestowed upon you; it is unthinkable if you 
are not to do your duty. Duty and freedom go 
together—I have mentioned it already, sometime back. 
Now, the duty that you are expected to perform in 
the world is not something imposed upon you by a 
government, or a social mandate from outside. It is the 
law of your own nature expecting you to do what is 
necessary, under the very structure of your own 
individuality, or jivatva—your personality. I go back to 
the analogy of the limbs of the body. You cannot even 
exist unless there is cooperation among the limbs of the 
body; there will be dismembering of your body, there 
will be a complete dislocation of the limbs, and there 
will be total destruction and an end of your existence 
itself. Na hi kaścit kṣaṇam api jātu tiṣṭhaty akarmakṛt, 
kāryate hy avaśaḥ karma sarvaḥ prakṛtijair guṇaiḥ (Gita 
3.5): No one exists without doing something. The world 
is active, perpetually—every atom is active. You will 
not see anything static in the world—not one cell of the 
body, not one electron—everything is vibrating 
terribly. Why should they move in this manner? The 
evolution of the universe is the answer. The world is 
active without remission of effort, for the achievement 
of a goal which is self-realisation of the cosmos. It is the 
universe attempting to be aware of its own majestic 
existence. What you call ‘evolution’ is only the process 
of the ascent, of the lower degrees of reality in the 
direction of the higher degrees. Unless the ‘Absolute 
Reality’ is contacted and made one’s own, evolution 
cannot cease. 


===== PAGE 61 / 161 =====

61 
 
The activities, the duties so-called, fulfil themselves 
in the realisation of the Absolute—God-realisation. 
Then there is no expectation on your part, and nobody 
expects you to do anything; the universe frees you from 
its clutches, and no law operates there because your 
being and the law become one. The will of the cosmos 
and the will of the individual get united, and actually, 
what you call ‘democracy’ is nothing but the union of 
the individual will with the national will. If there is no 
such unity, there is no democracy. Likewise, when the 
Universal Will and the individual will seem to be 
working in harmony, karma yoga is being performed by 
you—every action becomes yoga, because it is a 
perpetual union of your being with the Being of the 
Universe. Karma yoga is action transmuted into the 
yoga of meditation. A meditation is the precedent of 
every right action. Ideas precede activities—thought 
comes first, action afterwards. Yoga is the union that is 
anterior to the action that follows from this union. You 
meditate first, think first, place yourself in an orderly 
position in respect of the universe, and then act, and 
then it becomes Yoga. So karma yoga is action which is 
yoga, and yoga is action—action is Yoga—they mean 
the same thing. All life becomes yoga. Even your 
breathing becomes yoga, provided you can connect this 
activity of your existence and your performance with 
the purpose of the cosmos, with the intention of God. 
This union of your will with the Cosmic Will is a yajna 
that you are performing—a sacrifice, a glorious 
performance which is also yoga. Yoga is sacrifice, 
sacrifice is yoga—yajna is yoga. This is the theme of 
some of the portions of the fourth chapter. 
 


===== PAGE 62 / 161 =====

62 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
LIFE AS A YAJNA OR SACRIFICE 
In the middle of the fourth chapter of the Gita, certain 
instructions are given on the performance of different 
kinds of sacrifice, known as yajnas. The word ‘yajna’ is a 
very significant one throughout the Bhagavadgita, 
perhaps through most of the scriptures in India, 
indicating that the principle of life consists in sacrifice 
of some sort or the other. The philosophy of India may, 
in a way, be summed up by the word ‘yajna’—sacrifice. 
Every moment of our life is a sacrifice that we perform 
in the direction of a higher fulfillment, and a sacrifice is 
therefore a gain and not a loss. In ordinary language we 
praise a person who has performed a sacrifice, thinking 
that sacrifice involves a sharing of one’s joy with others, 
in a sense a sort of loss which one has voluntarily 
incurred for the welfare of other people. “Oh, what a 
sacrifice he has done,” thus we ejaculate. This is our 
point of view—whenever we give something, we feel 
we lose something. Sacrifice, no doubt, means giving 
something, but it does not mean losing something. In 
giving, we do not lose. Give and it shall be given back 
hundredfold. It is difficult to understand the meaning of 
sacrifice, and a knowledge of it is absolutely necessary 
to understand the teachings of the Bhagavadgita. The 
whole of karma yoga, or any yoga for the matter of that, 
is centred round this principle governing all life and 
existence—the principle of yajna, sacrifice. 


===== PAGE 63 / 161 =====

63 
 
In the fourth chapter, indications are given of the 
possibility of performing different kinds of sacrifice. A 
purely philosophical and spiritual touch is given to this 
description of the different forms of sacrifice here, 
because the Bhagavadgita is pre-eminently a spiritual 
gospel, a gospel of all life, and thus very comprehensive 
in its treatment of the basic values of life. Dravyayajna, 
yogoyajna, tapoyajna, jnanayajna are some of the terms 
used in this connection. Without going into the verbal 
or linguistic meaning of these terms, and without 
confusing 
you 
too 
much 
with 
the 
academic 
interpretations of these enunciations of the forms of 
sacrifice, I can clinch the whole matter by bringing you 
back to the process of cosmology, evolution—a thing 
we can never afford to forget throughout our studies 
because the story of creation or the procession of the 
cosmological event also suggests acutely the position 
we occupy in this world, our status in this universe, 
without which we can do nothing correctly, nor can we 
know anything properly. Yajna—sacrifice—whatever 
be the form it may take, is a summoning of the higher 
power into one’s own self, and a consequent surrender 
of the lower self for the higher dimension of one’s own 
being, known as the superior Self. 
It is also not easy to understand what this higher 
Self means; nor can we know what the lower self is. 
Though we may repeat these words again and again, 
and to some extent know their literal meanings, their 
practical suggestiveness is hard for the mind to grasp. 
The higher Self is not a spatially located, ascending 
series, but a more intensely inclusive and pervasive 
nature of our own self—something like the superiority 
of 
the 
waking 
consciousness 
over 
the 
dream 


===== PAGE 64 / 161 =====

64 
 
consciousness. The waking mind is not kept over the 
dreaming mind, as one thing kept over another thing. 
The superiority, the transcendence of one thing over 
the other, or one thing being higher than the other, 
should not and does not suggest a spatial distance, but 
a logical superiority which is to be distinguished from 
spatial transcendence as someone sitting over another 
person’s head. The cosmological scheme, to which we 
have made reference earlier, enlightens us into the fact 
that we as individuals or human beings are basically 
inseparable from the whole of creation, the five 
elements: earth, water, fire, air, ether; the five 
tanmatras: sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa, gandha; and the 
whole of space-time itself. We are not outside this large 
complex of the expanse of the universe. Though this 
may be the fact, this also seems to be the conclusion 
that we are driven to by a study of the cosmological 
process. 
We, in our daily life, seem to be totally ignoring this 
fact; and by a complete violation of this principle, 
asserting our individuality, seem to be totally 
disconnected from everything else as if we have 
nothing to do with anybody else. We have various types 
of selfishness—attachment to one’s own body is the 
grossest form of it, and it has subtler forms of egoism, 
such as psychological self-assertiveness. Attachment to 
anything that is connected to one’s self also comes 
under the purview and the gamut of selfishness. 
Anything that would not accept the basic organic 
relations of one’s self with what is external to one’s self, 
should be considered as a form of selfishness, whatever 
be the height it has reached; it may be a national 
egoism, or even an international one, but it is nothing 


===== PAGE 65 / 161 =====

65 
 
short of it. One cannot easily escape this predicament 
because of the perception of the world by the senses. 
The yajnas or the sacrifices mentioned here in the 
Bhagavadgita in the fourth chapter are, to some extent, 
gradational attempts on the part of the seeker to 
overcome selfishness and increase their dimension of 
one’s self by attuning one’s self to the larger Self, which 
is nothing but the establishment of an en rapport with a 
wider area of our relationship than the one to which we 
are limited at the present moment, due to our sensory 
outlook. 
Physically, 
psychologically, 
and 
even 
intellectually, we are somehow connected to other 
people and even the five elements, the tanmatras, the 
ahamkara, the mahat and the other things we have 
mentioned in the Samkhya cosmological scheme. So 
sacrifice, yajna, should therefore mean an inward 
transmutation of our consciousness in its apprehension 
of relationship with these layers or levels of 
cosmological descent and ascent; and there are, 
perhaps, as many types of sacrifice as we would 
recognise layers in the cosmological scheme. If we say 
there are infinite series, there can be infinite types of 
sacrifice. It depends upon our understanding of what 
the universe is and how the creation process has taken 
place. 
Again, I wish to bring to your memories our earlier 
studies concerning the structure of our personality and 
its connection with the outer world—namely, that 
internal to the body we have other types of apparatus 
like the sense organs, the pranas, the mind and the 
intellect, which have a tendency to affirm the physical 
individuality of the person, and affirm also all the 
attachments and aversions consequent upon this 


===== PAGE 66 / 161 =====

66 
 
affirmation in respect of the outer world of persons and 
things. So, one kind of yajna or sacrifice would imply 
self-control, a restraining of the movement of the 
senses of the mind and the intellect, because an 
unrestrained set of senses, uncontrolled mind, and 
unsubdued intellect would mean a personality that is 
engulfed in a desire for spatial contact with persons 
and things outside, while really, persons and things are 
not outside. The reason for self-control arises because 
of the fact that the usual perceptions of the senses are 
erroneous perceptions, because the senses have no 
other work to do than to din into our minds the 
externality of the world, the outsideness of things, and 
the isolation of our self from other people. There is a 
continuous brainwashing process going on in our 
relationship to the senses; and we have no other 
relationship in the world, unfortunately. We are totally 
sense-ridden, and the world that we live in is a sense 
world. Our thinking process and our intellection also is 
conditioned by the knowledge provided to us by means 
of sense perception. There is a total misfortune 
descended upon us, as it were, considering the state of 
affairs in which we are now—socially, physically and 
psychologically. Socially we are in a misfortune because 
of a wrong understanding of our connection with other 
people, and psychologically so, because of our 
dependence, inwardly also, upon what we know by 
means of the senses, which is erroneous. So, self-
control, which includes sense-control, is also mind-
control, intellect-control, reason-control—the total 
control of one’s own self. The control of one’s self is the 
essence of yoga. Here a word of explanation may be 
necessary as to what is meant by control of one’s self. 


===== PAGE 67 / 161 =====

67 
 
What do we do with ourselves when we try to restrain 
our selves? For that we may need to know what we are. 
This again brings us to the point of the cosmological 
scheme. We can know, to some extent, what we are, by 
placing ourselves in the cosmological scheme, and we 
do not require instruction of any kind in this context, 
because the moment we know how we have come, we 
can also know where we are sitting. Our duties become 
explicit and perspicacious the moment we know our 
condition and the atmosphere in which we are living. 
The control of one’s self—sense-restraint, self-
control—is the restraint of consciousness, finally; it has 
little to do with our physical limbs. It is not tightening 
the legs, plugging the ears or closing the eyes physically 
speaking, because our joys and sorrows are the 
outcome of a movement of a consciousness in a 
particular way. Thoughts are joys and sorrows; so joys 
and sorrows are nothing but thought processes, which 
is another way of saying the whirling of consciousness 
in 
a 
particular 
manner. 
Our 
individualised 
consciousness, for the purpose of easy understanding—
we may identify it with our mind in a more generalised 
sense—this 
individualised 
consciousness 
is 
the 
principle of the affirmation of individuality. The ego, 
the intellect, the reason, and what we think we are at 
the present moment—all these are inseparable from 
this type of activity of consciousness. Thus, self-control 
would mean a bringing back of the surging individual 
consciousness in the direction of external things, and 
enabling it to settle in its own self. This is the whole 
yoga of Patanjali, for instance, which summarises in 
two sutras—yogaś citta vṛtti nirodhaḥ and tadā draṣṭuḥ 
svarūpe avasthānam (Y.S. 1.2-3): “The restraint of the 


===== PAGE 68 / 161 =====

68 
 
mind is yoga, and then there is establishment of self in 
its own self.” Here is the whole of yoga in two 
sentences. 
Now, the establishment of consciousness in its own 
self is simultaneous with and inseparable from the 
restraint of consciousness from its movement in the 
direction of objects; and vice-versa—the restraint of 
consciousness in its movement in this form would be a 
movement in the other direction, for establishment in 
its own self. Every perception involves a degree of loss 
of self-consciousness. Whether we love a thing or hate a 
thing, we have lost ourselves in that measure and to 
that degree. An amount of ourselves, a quantum of our 
personality, moves out of itself towards that which we 
like or hate, and to that extent we are weakened. One 
who loves or hates is a weak person, because of the fact 
that some part of one’s self is borne in the direction of 
that which is liked or hated. So to strengthen one’s 
mind for the purpose of higher concentration, to free 
one’s self from this weakness that has arisen on 
account of love and hatred, one has to bring the mind or 
consciousness back from that centre, which is the 
source of its like or dislike, and then there is a 
rejuvenation of ourselves. We feel an inner strength 
arising from a source unknown, due to the mere fact of 
our coming back to our own selves. Mostly, we are not 
in our own selves—we are other than what we are. This 
being other than what we are is the malady of life—we 
are always conscious of somebody else. There is no 
other work for us except to be aware that others are 
and to deal with others—with other people and other 
things. This so-called ‘otherness’ harasses us so much 
that we seem to be living in a world of destruction, 


===== PAGE 69 / 161 =====

69 
 
death—mrityuloka as it is called—and nothing can be 
worse than this condition of ours. To be brooding over 
what is not there, and to be totally oblivious of what is 
there, seems to be the great business of this world. That 
things are not totally outside us is obliterated from our 
consciousness by the vehemence of this surge of 
ourselves in the direction of things. Yajna or sacrifice as 
yoga or self-control implies therefore an inner training, 
a sort of educational activity going on inside, 
enlightenment as it is, by which we become filled with 
strength with our inward bond with things—not as the 
senses tell us, but as things really stand. 
The world of sense-perception is conditioned by 
space-time 
and 
the 
various 
categories 
of 
the 
psychological process; while the thing, the person, the 
being, the substance as it is in itself, is behind this 
curtain of space-time. Our real being also is behind this 
curtain of the psycho-physical individuality. Thus we 
are living in a phenomenal world, both subjectively and 
objectively. The thing-in-itself, as they say, the 
substance as such, eludes the grasp of this phenomenal 
process—thus no man can see God, and the intellect of 
man is not fit enough to contact reality. Unless we 
develop a mechanism within our own selves to go 
deeper into this large area of phenomenality—
subjectively as well as objectively—the plumbing into 
one’s own self is also the plumbing through space and 
time. Modern science says the inward, subjective, 
subatomic philosophy of quantum theory is identical 
with the spatio-temporal theory of relativity—Tat tvam 
asi: That is this and this is That. The inward depth is 
also the outward plumbing of the abyss of space and 
time. The deeper we go inwardly, simultaneously there 


===== PAGE 70 / 161 =====

70 
 
is a going deep into the outer cosmos—and vice-versa, 
the plumbing into the cosmos objectively would also 
imply a going deep into one’s own self. Knowledge of 
the self is the knowledge of the universe, and the 
knowledge of the universe is the knowledge of the self. 
Atman is Brahman. 
This is a profound philosophy that is hidden behind 
performance of sacrifice, self-control, practice of yoga, 
the control of senses, the restraint of the mind and the 
stabilising of the intellect and the reason. We have to 
perform a double process—sometimes mentioned in 
the Bhagavadgita and also in Patanjali—of vairagya and 
abhyasa, a dual action of withdrawal and union. The 
performance of this dual function may be said to be a 
simultaneous action taking place, as recovering from 
illness is also the regaining of health and the going 
away of night is the coming in of day. There is no 
temporal successiveness in these processes; they 
happen to be a simultaneous occurrence. Thus, the 
vairagya that we speak of in yoga, the dissociation of 
consciousness from erroneous thinking and contact, is 
simultaneously a concentration of consciousness on 
that 
which 
lies 
above 
itself—the 
lower 
self 
concentrates itself on the higher.  
Now I am coming to that point as to what the lower 
self is and what the higher Self is. The lower self is that 
state of consciousness which is conditioned by the urge 
in the direction of objects. The higher Self is that which 
is the condition of freedom, attained by even a single 
step taken by this involved consciousness in the 
direction of disentanglement with objects. Thus every 
ascent is a regaining of one’s Self, and an asset on the 
side of strengthening of one’s personality. Vairagya and 


===== PAGE 71 / 161 =====

71 
 
abhyasa mean detachment and communion. Here, 
many people may get misguided due to the difficulty in 
understanding the true meaning of these terms, 
vairagya 
and 
abhyasa—renunciation, 
abrogation, 
detachment or non-attachment, going together with 
concentration, meditation, etc. We have to correctly 
understand what detachment means in order to know 
what communion is; and the whole of yoga is this much. 
If we commit an initial error, then we would be piling 
error over error in our subsequent actions or 
performances. Thus, we have to be vigilant at the very 
beginning. 
Detachment is a success that we achieve in freeing 
our consciousness from involvement in any kind of 
objectivity—whether it is the form of intense liking or 
intense dislike, or finally even in the complacency that 
things really are outside. The initial step or stage in 
self-control would require us to free ourselves from 
emotional involvements, either in the form of intense 
like or intense dislike. But even if we are emotionally 
free and there is no great passion for things either 
positively or negatively, we may yet be unfit for the 
higher requirements in yoga. A mere good man need 
not necessarily be a fit person for yoga, because while 
goodness is a great thing indeed, a highly valued thing, 
it is itself not sufficient because yoga is super-ethical—
it goes beyond the morality of mankind. It is not merely 
goodness, charitableness and a humanitarian feeling, 
though all these things are wonderful in themselves. So, 
when there is a freedom achieved to some extent from 
emotional involvements in the form of love and hatred, 
we might have attained a great thing indeed—it is a 
very important success—but yoga is something deeper 


===== PAGE 72 / 161 =====

72 
 
and more difficult to grasp because, as we make a 
distinction between abnormal psychology and general 
psychology or rather, the psychoanalytical process and 
the study of ordinary psychological functions, we may 
have to make a distinction between two types of 
involvement of the mind in objectivity—the one 
emotional and the other perceptional. 
Emotional 
involvements 
are 
studied 
in 
psychoanalysis, 
sometimes 
known 
as 
‘abnormal 
psychology’. By a deep understanding of our own self, 
we may be a healthy person psychically, and 
psychoanalytically we are perfectly hale and robust. 
But from the point of view of yoga, we may still be an 
abnormal person—because abnormality does not 
necessarily mean being a psychoanalytic patient. There 
can be a ‘metaphysical error’ as philosophers would put 
it, apart from a mere social, political or emotional 
mistake that we commit. Here it is that yoga goes 
beyond mere human ways of thinking, much less social 
and political ways. It is a cosmic way of envisaging 
everything, which will inject a sort of shock into us. We 
may begin to shudder even to think of the possibility of 
there being such a way of encounter with things, and 
this is the reason why sometimes we feel tremor in the 
body when we go deep into meditation—a shock which 
the pranas receive by the impact of the mind upon 
them, due to the intensity of our concentration on a 
supernormal level, which goes beyond ordinary human 
thinking. 
So even if we are emotionally free and a good 
individual indeed, well adored and respected in 
humanity, we may not be prepared for yoga; because 
yoga is a preparation to embrace a reality, which is not 


===== PAGE 73 / 161 =====

73 
 
necessarily a human world. This is also touched upon, 
pithily, in some of the aphorisms of Patanjali, which is 
not my subject at present—I am concerned with the 
Bhagavadgita. So, coming to the point of yajna, sacrifice, 
self-control, we seem to conclude that every sacrifice 
which is true to its spirit involves a metaphysical 
injection that we give to the psychological process of 
the mind, a spiritual adventure more than any other 
kind of human activity or a religious routine. We ascend 
into a supernormal degree of comprehension in our 
adventure of vairagya and abhyasa—withdrawal and 
union. From what do we withdraw ourself, and with 
what do we commune ourself? The withdrawal, as I 
mentioned, is not from the substance of the persons 
and things or the five elements, but from the way, the 
manner in which they are perceived by the senses, the 
mind and the intellect. Our opinion about things is what 
is important, rather than the things themselves. Our 
understanding is what is our concern, and not what we 
are understanding—the thing as such. The world, 
physically speaking, is not so much our concern in yoga 
as the way in which we are understanding it, and the 
manner in which we react to it. 
Thus the process of vairagya, or detachment, is 
more a psychological activity rather than a physical 
performance. It is something that is happening inside in 
the mind. So we can detach ourselves from things even 
in the midst of things. Even in the thick of the bustle of 
people and the noises of the world, we can be detached, 
because the bustle and the haste, the movement and 
the noise are not the things that trouble us; the trouble 
arises from our reaction to them. The world is what it 
was, and perhaps it will be what it was—nobody can 


===== PAGE 74 / 161 =====

74 
 
change it, and perhaps there is no need to change it; but 
there is necessity to change our understanding of it. It 
is possible to be free from concern with the external 
events in the world by a modification or an amendment 
of our outlook or perspective in life, even in the midst 
of thick activity. Here is the principle of karma yoga 
coming again: in the midst of intense activity one can be 
in a state of deep communion with the Ultimate Reality 
because of the fact that the mind is in the state of 
vairagya—completely 
withdrawn 
from 
erroneous 
associations with the events taking place with persons, 
with things, with activities. On the other hand, one may 
be in the top of Mount Everest, yet one may be involved 
in the world process. The thick of the jungle is not 
necessarily a safe place for the practice of yoga, because 
the absence of the presence of things, though it is an 
important thing indeed, is secondary considering our 
attitude to them. A deeply involved person may be 
involved even in the thickest forest—and an inwardly 
detached person may be detached even in the thick 
street of a large city. If we are honestly intent upon 
achieving true success in what is called ‘yoga’, we 
should not merely pat ourselves on the back and 
imagine that we are in a state of yoga or religious 
activity merely because it appears to be so, and people 
also say so. People may say anything—the saying of the 
people is no matter with us; it is another thing 
altogether that worries us and perhaps is our concern. 
So, the yoga, the sacrifice—which is control of the 
senses, restraint of the mind, and the stabilising of the 
reasoning process, which is the yajna, the various types 
of yajna mentioned in the fourth chapter: prana, manas, 
indriya etc. mentioned there—all these suggest a single 


===== PAGE 75 / 161 =====

75 
 
action on the part of our consciousness, namely an 
awakening into a higher Self. We may wonder why we 
should go on using the word ‘Self’ again and again, as if 
there is nothing else and no other word will connote 
what is our intention. The word ‘Self’ is a very 
important thing, because it suggests the true nature of 
things. We are not likely to understand the meaning of 
it because we are accustomed to identify self with our 
personality: ‘yourself’, ‘ myself’, ‘himself’, ‘herself’, 
‘itself’. These grammatical words that we use suggest a 
wrong meaning of the term ‘Self’. Self does not mean a 
person or a thing, though it is associated with a 
description of persons and things, yourself and others. 
The word ‘Self’ actually means the non-objective status 
occupied by everything in the world. Here is a sentence 
on which we have to bestow deep thought. A non-
objective status which everyone enjoys and everything 
enjoys—this is called the Self. The Self is that which 
cannot be externalised, cannot be objectified, cannot 
become other than what it is; it cannot know itself as an 
‘other’. It is not an ‘other’—it is just what it is. The real 
‘you’ or the ‘I’ is what we call the ‘Self’. This ‘I’ cannot 
become a ‘you’, a ‘he’, ‘she’, ‘it’—it is just what it is. 
Inasmuch as this is the condition of everyone and 
everything, in a way we may say the whole universe is 
just the Self. The whole universe is a Self, only to be 
understood in its proper significance. If the whole 
universe is a Self and it cannot be objectified, because a 
Self is a non-objectified status, it would mean the 
universe is an intense self-consciousness; actually, 
what you call God is nothing but this. It is a highly 
enhanced condition of universal self-consciousness. 
This Self, which is principally and primarily a universal 


===== PAGE 76 / 161 =====

76 
 
being, gets conditioned, by degrees, into lower forms of 
experience, until it descends into our personality-
consciousness of the so-called physical ‘I’, the physical 
‘you’, the physical ‘it’. Thus it is self-control—I am 
coming to the point again—self-control means the 
restraining of the lower experience of the self by 
uniting it with the higher experience of its own Self. It is 
not a communion with somebody else. You are 
communing with your own self only in a larger, 
pervasive form than the condition in which you are at 
present. Your connectedness with things ascends in a 
series of larger pervasiveness until it reaches the apex 
of 
this 
pervasiveness 
in 
God-consciousness 
or 
Universal-realisation. 
So, self-control begins with a little action of 
restraining the senses, and then becomes wider and 
wider, by degrees. These are the samapattis or 
samadhis mentioned in the sutras of Patanjali. These 
are the seven stages of knowledge. These are the 
communes attained with the levels of being, the realms 
of consciousness, the planes, etc.—these are the forms 
of Self. Gradually we get united with them until we 
become wider and wider, deeper and deeper, heavier 
and heavier, more and more comprises us, and nearer 
and nearer to our own self than we are now. Now we 
are far away from us. What a pity, we are far from our 
own selves. In the sense we are not this self we are 
thinking ourselves to be, as conditioned by this body; 
there is a larger kingdom in which we are residing, 
even now, from which we are apparently exiled into 
this grossness of the prison-house of this body 
consciousness. These are the fundamentals, and this is 


===== PAGE 77 / 161 =====

77 
 
the background of all forms of self-control, which is the 
final meaning of any form of sacrifice—yajna. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 78 / 161 =====

78 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
SELF-RESTRAINT AND THE NATURE OF THE SELF 
Chapters four, five and six of the Bhagavadgita in a way 
dilate upon the discipline that is required in the 
practise of yoga. Some aspect of it I touched upon 
yesterday, and the study we made already is the 
foundational character of spiritual discipline, in a sense. 
Spiritual discipline, which may be considered to be 
almost the same as what you regard as self-control, is a 
many-sided, spiritual effort. The whole of yoga is self-
restraint and a simultaneous self-recovery. It is dying to 
live, as Swami Sivanandaji Maharaj used to say many a 
time. The process of vairagya and abhyasa constitutes a 
sort of dying, for the sake of a living in a higher sense. 
This dying is not a loss—you will bring back to your 
memories what I told you yesterday—it is a gaining of 
the originality of things by awakening from one’s 
involvement in the phenomenality of things. Thus, a 
rising of the spirit from this world involvement is not a 
loss of contact or relationship with the world; it is a 
rising to the consciousness of the true nature of things. 
It is hard for the common person, common 
individual, the lay mind, to appreciate the meaning of 
this self-recovery or self-establishment, inasmuch as 
the human mind is so much engrossed in relational 
contact with objects of sense that the objects and the 
body of one’s own personality have become more real 
than what you consider as the originality of things 
which, to our present state of understanding, appear as 


===== PAGE 79 / 161 =====

79 
 
mere abstractions. Realities look like concepts—while, 
when we go deep into the matter by a thorough 
analysis of the circumstances of life, we will realise our 
experience of this world is a conceptual involvement, a 
phenomenal association, a contrivance, a makeshift, a 
tentative adjustment which cannot be regarded as a 
permanent state of affairs. The transitional character of 
the world, so much spoken of, is the outcome of a 
necessity felt in every corner of creation to effect 
moment-to-moment adjustments between subject and 
object, on account of it being impossible for any 
condition to be perpetually in that condition only. The 
urge of the finite in the direction of the Infinite is a 
perennial call from the Infinite. It is an incessant 
movement of the finite towards the Infinite, a flow 
which is continuous like the movement of waters in a 
river. Our life may be considered to be such a 
movement, a flow, an analogy with which we are not 
very unfamiliar. Life is like the flow of a river, or the 
burning of the flame of a lamp which appears to 
maintain a substantiality and a solidity for all 
perceptional purposes, but is in fact a process rather 
than an existence. 
 Thus, the reality of the world seems to be a process 
rather than being as such. So we are many a time told 
that man needs to be—he never is; we are to be yet. 
This is a slant given to the conditions of life in certain 
discourses of the Buddha, a point made out in Buddhist 
philosophy concerning the transient nature of things—
which has been given a metaphysical touch by certain 
modern thinkers like the well-known Alfred North 
Whitehead, a physicist-turned-philosopher, who speaks 
like Buddha and speaks like Acharya Shankara, speaks 


===== PAGE 80 / 161 =====

80 
 
like Hegel, speaks like Einstein, and speaks like Plato, 
from many angles of vision. What we learn from all 
these discussions and analyses is that this world we 
live in is not a permanent home of any person. We are 
located in a particular condition of a process, which is 
incessantly active, which never rests, and which moves 
without sleep because of the fact that the relationship 
of the finite to the Infinite is an indescribable impulse of 
the whole phenomenal nature in the direction of the 
heart of all things, the core of all existence, which is a 
consciousness of an infinite centre operating at the 
back of all phenomenal diversities. 
So, when we enter into the path of yoga, we 
gradually discover and come to know that in this 
arduous adventure of ours, we are tending to become 
more and more non-individual in our perspective, in 
our needs, and in our operations, so that the practise of 
yoga ceases to be a purely individual affair—it has 
relationships with many other things and perhaps all 
things of which this vast universe may consist. As 
threads are involved in a widespread fabric, our so-
called individuality is involved in this network of 
creational process. Though due to the hardness of the 
ego—the intensity of our psychophysical affirmation—
we may not be cognisant of our larger involvement in 
the set-up of things and may grow complacent that we 
are merely this hard-body individuality, when we 
analyse our involvement psychologically and we 
become more philosophical in our thinking, we would 
be compelled to shed this complacency, and we will be 
face-to-face with a new vista of things wherein and 
whereby we discover our involvement in a larger set-
up of the nature of the universe. This is a great solace 


===== PAGE 81 / 161 =====

81 
 
which will be administered into us by the Bhagavadgita 
as we proceed further and further through the 
chapters, until we reach an apotheosis of this analysis 
and the truth is unveiled in a sort of apocalypse—the 
Vishvarupa to be described in the eleventh chapter. 
I try to continue the thread from where I left 
yesterday concerning the relationship between the 
lower self and the higher self, to which a reference will 
been made in the fifth and the sixth chapters 
particularly. The essence of yoga practice may be said 
to be summed up in two verses towards the end of the 
fifth chapter, to be detailed further on in the sixth, and 
these two verses are concise and pithy: sparśān kṛtvā 
bahir bāhyāṁś cakṣuś caivāntare bhruvoḥ, prāṇāpānau 
samau 
kṛtvā 
nāsābhyantaracāriṇau; 
yatendriya-
manobuddhir munir mokṣaparāyaṇaḥ; vigatecchābhaya-
krodho yaḥ sadā mukta eva saḥ (Gita 5.27-28). These 
two verses sow the seed for the elaboration in the sixth 
chapter on dhyana yoga or meditation—the integration 
of personality. 
The senses are to be withdrawn from their contact 
with the objects. The objects are to be shut-out from 
their relationship with the senses: sparśān kṛtvā bahir 
bāhyāṁ. Here, there is something interesting for us to 
know. The necessity to sever sensory contact with 
external objects arises on account of a basic error 
involved in this contact. All contacts are wombs of pain, 
says the Gita in another place: ye hi saṁsparśajā bhogā 
duḥkhayonaya eva te ādyantavantaḥ (Gita 5.22). The 
desire of the mind to come in contact with objects 
through the senses arises on account of the mistaken 
notion that pleasure rises from the objects. As milk is 
oozed out from the udder of the cow, it appears that 


===== PAGE 82 / 161 =====

82 
 
objects ooze out satisfaction, joy—nectar seems to be 
milked-out of the objects by the senses through their 
contact. This is a gross mistake; there is no such thing 
taking place. The joys of life arise on account of a 
circumstance quite different from what we imagine in 
our minds, out of point altogether from the connection 
of the senses with physical objects. 
Firstly, a real contact with objects is not possible, 
due to the operation of a differentiating factor which 
cuts off the subjects from the objects—space and time. 
This screen, which is hanging in front of our eyes, 
space-time as you call it, prevents a real communion of 
the subject with the object; and all contact is finally a 
desire for such a communion which is never attained. 
Thus the desire is never fulfilled, finally, because the 
contact, which is the objective behind the manifestation 
of a desire, is never really attained. There is only a 
tantalising phenomenon taking place, misleading the 
mind and completely defeating the senses of their 
purpose. The objects repel the senses because of the 
impossibility of coming in contact with the objects. 
The desire for an object, as I mentioned, is a desire 
for union with the object, possession of the object, 
enjoyment of the object—by an entry into it, if it were 
possible, and the bringing the object so close to one’s 
self that the distinction between one’s self and the 
object is abolished in a space-transcending experience; 
but this is not possible in this world of space and time. 
We can never really come in contact with anything in 
this world; we cannot possess anything in this world 
because of this difficulty. The externality principle 
which is space-time, or you may call it by any other 
name—is so vehemently active that it will not permit 


===== PAGE 83 / 161 =====

83 
 
the coming in contact of one thing with another in the 
manner of a communion or an entry of one thing into 
another. ‘A’ can never become ‘B’. ‘A’ is ‘A’, ‘B’ is ‘B’, 
subject is subject, and object is object. Thus everyone 
gets defeated in this world, and no one goes from here 
with the satisfaction that the objectives of life craved 
for have been really fulfilled or attained. This is one of 
the reasons why the desire for contact with objects of 
senses is futile, finally. Pariṇāma tāpa saṁskāra (Y.S. 
2.15) are some of the points mentioned in a sutra of 
Patanjali as factors which should dissuade anyone from 
enshrining in one’s heart an inordinate longing for 
anything in this world. The consequence of the 
fulfilment of a desire is an increase of the desire, and 
not a fulfilment of the desire. Desire flames up like 
raging fire which is fed with clarified butter when it is 
attempted to be fulfilled, and desire is never 
extinguished by its being fed with the fuel of sense 
objects. The reason is that every enjoyment, every 
sensory contact effecting this imagined satisfaction, 
acts as a medium to confirm this error—that joy arises 
from the objects. There is a reinforcement of the 
error—that joy is embedded in the objects—so one 
goes more and more towards the objects, and does not 
learn a lesson that a mistake had been involved in this 
craving of the senses for objects. Thus the consequence 
of the fulfilment of a desire is an increased impetuosity 
of the desire, not the fulfilment. A desire is never 
fulfilled; it only gets increased. 
Secondly, there is anxiety attending upon the desire 
to enjoy or possess the objects of sense. There is 
restlessness of mind before one comes in contact with 
the object of one’s longing, distress regarding the 


===== PAGE 84 / 161 =====

84 
 
possibility or otherwise of one’s success in obtaining 
one’s objective: “Will I succeed, or will I not succeed?” 
This is the agony and the anguish that attends upon the 
desire to come in contact with an object. But once the 
contact is established and there is a conviction that the 
object is under one’s possession, there is another 
anxiety—namely, “How long will it be with me? I may 
be dispossessed of it.” Because subconsciously we 
know that no object can be possessed by us for a long 
time, much less forever, there is a subtle, distressing 
feeling at the root of our personality, even during the 
process of the so-called enjoyment of the object of 
sense. So there is no unadulterated happiness even 
when we are apparently enjoying the so-called 
imagined happiness by contact of the sense of sensory 
objects. There is sorrow at the root of all things, even at 
the base of this apparent, momentary satisfaction. Such 
a joy is compared sometimes in our scriptures to the 
cool shadow that we may enjoy under the hood of the 
cobra. It is cool no doubt, and we also know many other 
things about it; such is this world. There is anxiety 
before, and anxiety during the so-called possession of 
the object, and we need not mention our condition after 
we are dispossessed of the object; we are in hell. “Oh, 
there is bereavement, there is loss and there is 
destruction. I am done for!” So, we were not happy 
earlier, we are not happy in the middle, and we are not 
happy afterwards. So in past, in present and future, 
desire keeps us in tender-hooks, though there is no joy 
in this world. Ye hi saṁsparśajā bhogā duḥkhayonaya 
eva te ādyantavantaḥ. 
There is also samskara-dukha, mentioned by 
Patanjali in one of the sutras. The impressions created 


===== PAGE 85 / 161 =====

85 
 
by the fulfilment of a desire will be enough to cast us, 
hurl into rebirth, because the samskaras, vasanas, or the 
grooves formed in the mind by the erroneous notion 
that joy is in the object. These grooves will become 
conditioning factors of the future destiny of the 
individual, and they will go on playing the same tune 
like a gramophone record, so that we will never forget 
an earlier enjoyment. They will be harassing us even in 
our dream, and they can persist even after the shedding 
of this body. Rebirth is caused by unfulfilled desires. 
The frailty of this body and the fickleness of our social 
relationships are such that all desires cannot be fulfilled 
in the short span of life. Hence something always 
remains as a residue unfulfilled, which rockets forth 
our subtle body to that particular condition in space-
time, where these unfulfilled longings can materialise; 
this process is called rebirth. Thus, the agony continues 
even in the future life—samskara-dukha. 
Fourthly, there is a philosophical or a metaphysical 
reason behind the impossibility to come in contact with 
real happiness in this world, that is, the perpetual 
rotation of the very constituents of prakriti: sattva, 
rajas, and tamas. What we call happiness is the 
preponderance of sattva, the equilibrating power of 
nature—which we rarely pass through in experience in 
life on account of our being mostly under the pressure 
of a desire which is unfulfilled, which is nothing but 
rajas acting, distracting our attention. There is a 
perpetual other-consciousness, an awareness that 
things are outside, which keeps us in a rajasic mode. 
Rajas is a condition of consciousness where it is forced 
to be aware of things other than its own self—duality-
consciousness, 
separation-consciousness, 
object-


===== PAGE 86 / 161 =====

86 
 
consciousness—and all these things attending upon 
this consciousness come under the activity of rajas 
which separates, dissects, cuts off one thing from the 
other, especially the subject from the object. 
The movement of prakriti, the rotation of the wheel 
of this natural process consisting of sattva, rajas, and 
tamas, never allows us to be in a permanent condition. 
Like the movement of a wheel which is in motion, 
conditions of prakriti are perpetually moving for the 
fulfilment of their own purpose, which is not 
necessarily our individual purpose. When there is a 
momentary cessation of rajasic activity—a flash of a 
second as it were, when we come in contact with an 
object—there is a preponderating feeling that the need 
for the movement of our mind towards the object 
ceases. When we are in possession of an object of 
desire, the need for the mind to be conscious of the 
object as an external something ceases, rajas does not 
operate for the flash of a moment, and the cessation of 
rajas is also a cessation of this other-consciousness, 
object-consciousness, which is tantamount to self-
consciousness. We turn to our own Self for the split 
fraction of a second, as it were, and consciousness 
which is the essence of our Atman or the Self, tastes its 
own Source, licks the bliss of its own essentiality and 
finds itself in a state of ecstasy, because the more we 
are in union with our own Self, the more intense is the 
satisfaction we feel, the rapture that we are in, the 
delight that we experience. All ananda, all joy, is a union 
of the subject with its own Self. 
Now, I turn your attention to a definition of this Self, 
which is a crucial point in our study of the sixth chapter 
of the Bhagavadgita, which describes the art of 


===== PAGE 87 / 161 =====

87 
 
meditation, the science of self-integration by means of 
an inward communion of the lower self with the higher 
Self—this was the subject of our study yesterday. We 
have, first of all, to de-condition our minds from 
assuming any notion already about the characteristic of 
the higher Self, the lower self, etc. All of our learning 
about this has to be foregone for the time being because 
many of us may not have a correct notion of what this 
Self means. We are mostly under a misapprehension 
concerning the nature of the Self. If you can recollect 
what I told you yesterday, it is a name that we give to 
pure subjectivity of awareness. We are never in this 
condition at any time in this world. We do not enjoy an 
experience of pure subjectivity at any time, except in a 
perforce way in the state of deep-sleep when we may 
be said to be purely subjective; but that does us no 
good because of an absence of what is happening to us 
there. Incidentally, the intensity of the joy that we feel 
in the state of deep-sleep is due to our union with our 
own Self—unconsciously though. However, the point is 
that this union with the pure Subject has to be effected 
in a conscious way; and a conscious endeavour on the 
part of one’s self to commune with this true Self in the 
various levels or degrees of its ascent may be said to be 
the function of yoga practise. All yoga is the art of 
communing one’s self with one’s Self. Again we are here 
in a difficulty in the matter of understanding what this 
‘one’s Self’ means. Everyone knows what this one self 
is. “I am here myself, you are there yourself.” We speak 
in this train, but this is a physical, social and psychical 
way of defining the self. But the Self, to reiterate, is pure 
subjectivity; and the psychological, physical or social 
self is an objectified form of Self. 


===== PAGE 88 / 161 =====

88 
 
In the language of the Vedanta, the Self is supposed 
to be understood by us in three ways—namely, the 
apparent self, which we seem to recognise in all objects 
of our longing or desire; a self which seems to be 
present in everything with which we are vitally 
connected, especially through our emotions, known as 
the gaunatman or the secondary self. The son loves his 
father, the father loves his son. We cannot say that the 
son is the father, or the father is the son. There is no 
intelligible explanation as to why the father should 
cling to his son as if he is his own self. However, the 
father loves his son as if the son is his own self, and the 
joy of the son is the joy of the father, the sorrow of the 
son is the sorrow of the father. Anything that happens 
to the son happens to the father. The birth and death of 
the son is the birth and death of the father, as it were, 
as we see in social parlance. How come the father sees 
himself in the son, the rich man sees himself in his 
wealth, and anyone fired up with an intense passion of 
any kind sees himself or herself in that object which is 
the target of this feeling? 
This particular object which forces the subject, 
directs its attention towards itself, this power in the 
object which necessitates the subject to pour itself 
upon itself on the object, is the bondage of the 
individual. The power by which we are compelled to be 
intensely conscious of that which is other than 
ourselves is the samsara, so-called—the involvement of 
every individual in a terrible, unintelligible network of 
suffering. The gaunatman, or the secondary self, is the 
object of our desire, to put it precisely; it may be son, it 
may be daughter, it may be wife, it may be husband, it 
may be any blessed thing. Now, why do we call these 


===== PAGE 89 / 161 =====

89 
 
objects as our self? In what sense do we regard them as 
an Atman, though it may be a secondary self or a 
gaunatman? It is impossible to love anything which is 
not a self; the Atman or the Self alone is the object of 
desire—no one can love anything except the Self. And 
even when we love anything apparently other than our 
self, we convert it into our self in some artificial 
manner; otherwise, love for a thing or for a person is 
unthinkable in this world. So even when we love our 
father, or son, or husband, or wife, or wealth, we are 
loving our own self in a terribly mistaken manner. A 
person is totally out of gear psychologically, in a 
terrible misconception, when one’s affections are 
poured over those things which cannot, in any way, 
identify with one’s self, for reasons already mentioned 
in the context of that sutra of Patanjali—Parinama 
papa, etc. We can never come in contact with them—
yet, we have no more regard in this world except the 
desire to come in contact. Life is a contradiction, it 
appears. It pulls us powerfully from two different 
directions in contrary ways. 
The gaunatman, therefore, is the secondary self—a 
self which is imagined, foisted upon that which can 
never become the self. The object can never become the 
subject, and our object of love or affection cannot 
become us. It cannot satisfy us, it is not us, we have no 
connection with it—yet we seem to be concerned only 
with that. This is the wisdom to which we are initiated 
by the social atmosphere in which we are born, and the 
education that we receive in this world. This is a 
travesty indeed, in which we find ourselves. 
You know very well why there should be 
withdrawal of consciousness from such contacts in the 


===== PAGE 90 / 161 =====

90 
 
process of self-control, in the execution of the art of 
yoga. There is also the other false self, called the 
mithya-atman, 
which 
is 
the 
psychophysical 
individuality—this so-called ‘I’, this physical ‘I’, this 
body ‘I’, this psychic ‘I’, this sensory ‘I’, etc. “I am 
coming, I am seated here, I shall go there, I shall do this, 
I am hungry, I am thirsty, I am happy, I am unhappy.” 
When you make statements of this kind you are 
referring to a false self in which you are involved. This 
false self is called the mithya-atman, consisting of the 
five sheaths to which we have already made 
reference—the koshas, so-called. They are the physical, 
vital, mental, intellectual, and the causal—annamaya, 
pranamaya, manomaya, vijnanamaya, anandamaya 
koshas, which are accretions grown over the central 
consciousness which is the true Atman, the mukhya-
atman, the primary self. These accretions are not vitally 
connected with the self—as much unconnected as 
clouds are in relation to the space in which they exist. 
You know how thick clouds can hang over our heads 
and appear to contaminate space and cloud even the 
sun itself. But the clouds do not cover the sun, and they 
do not contaminate space, though it appears that they 
do this. Like thick layers of clouds, this mithya-atman 
consists of unfulfilled longings. They include what you 
call the subconscious layer, unconscious layer, etc. They 
are the psychic personality of ours—the emotional, the 
vital, the volitional, etc., and even the physical bodily 
self. Other than this gaunatman, or the secondary self, 
the object of our love and hatred, other than this false 
self, the five koshas, there is a true subjectivity in us, in 
the direction of which we move gradually along the 
lines of the cosmological scheme laid before us by the 


===== PAGE 91 / 161 =====

91 
 
cosmological scheme laid before us by the Samkhya, 
which the Vedanta also accepts in many of its features. 
“The self has to be raised by the Self,” says the 
Bhagavadgita: uddhared ātmanātmānaṁ (Gita 6.5). 
“The Self is the friend of the self”: bandhur ātmaiva 
ripur ātmanaḥ. Your own Self is your friend, and your 
Self has to guide your self. You may become your friend, 
and you may also become your enemy, under certain 
given conditions. Ātmaiva hyātmano bandhur ātmaiva 
ripur ātmanaḥ: “You have no friends outside you, you 
have no enemies outside you—you are your friend, you 
are your enemy.” When you see friends outside and 
enemies outside, again you are committing this mistake 
of identifying yourself with the gaunatman. The 
secondary self takes possession of the true Self, as it 
were, with such a power and intensity of grasp that we 
seem to be seeing ourselves in our so-called 
externalised forms of friends and enemies, while really 
we have gone against the larger dimension of our own 
higher Self when we confront enemies in this world, 
and we are in harmony with the dimension of our own 
higher Self when we see friends around us. Thus, the 
objects of the world do not concern us, unless our self is 
connected with them in some way or the other, 
positively in love, or negatively in hatred. 
Thus, we are living in a world of ‘Self’, and not in a 
world of objects. The so-called objects are not our 
concern. They become our concern, they become even 
the objects of our awareness of their being there on 
account of the consciousness moving towards them and 
enveloping them, entering them, possessing them, and 
getting identified with them in some manner, which is 
the epistemological process in the perception of an 


===== PAGE 92 / 161 =====

92 
 
object. We cannot even know that the world exists 
unless we move outwardly in space and time in the 
direction of another location where we place ourselves, 
for the time being, either in love or hatred, so that even 
there we are coming in contact with our own selves—
only in a larger manner. Thus, idaṁ sarvam, yad ayam 
ātmā (Brihad.U. 2.4.6): All this universe is Self laid out 
before the experiencing consciousness, with which the 
self is identified, and vice versa. The whole universe is 
Self and the objects, so-called, are misconceived 
locations and spatially-concealed positions of this 
universally pervasive Self, which is the Atman. This is a 
philosophical background of the necessity for the 
practise of self-control and meditation. When you 
understand this background you will also know 
automatically the techniques that you have to adopt in 
the control of the senses, in the practise of self-
restraint, in meditation on Reality, which will be the 
subject of the sixth chapter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 93 / 161 =====

93
Chapter 7 
MEDITATION—A DISCIPLINE OF 
SELF-INTEGRATION 
The discipline of yoga culminates in meditation, 
dhyana, which is the subject of the sixth chapter of the 
Bhagavadgita. The art of yoga is principally the process 
of self-integration by degrees through the levels of the 
constitution of one’s personality, such that when we 
reach the point of meditation proper there is a total 
concentration of the whole of one’s being in the 
direction of the whole of that which one aspires for 
through this discipline we call ‘yoga’. Last time we 
noted that essentially this is a technique of communing 
the lower self with the higher self, and I endeavoured to 
briefly mention the characteristics of the higher self 
and the way in which we have to understand what this 
term means. It means many things, and in every sense 
of the term it has to be taken into consideration when it 
becomes an object of meditation—gradually by stages. 
We can today take up the practical side of it as 
enunciated in the sixth chapter, since the theoretical 
side is already known to you, to some extent, through 
our studies conducted earlier. 
Meditation is no doubt the fruit of the enterprise 
called yoga, but it is a fruit of the tree of an inner 
development into a state of maturity of personality 
which is prepared for this last attack, as it were, on the 
problem 
of 
truth—of 
reality. 
The 
scattered 
particularities of human thinking get gathered in this 


===== PAGE 94 / 161 =====

94 
 
focusing of attention, and we may bring back to our 
memories here what we understood of the process of 
vairagya and abhyasa—the detachment which is a 
requisite in this practice, and a concentration or 
habituation of consciousness which is simultaneous 
with it. This mustering in of the forces of one’s self, the 
focusing of them, and the attention to be paid on the 
object of meditation—all these processes involve a 
gathering up of whatever we are, in every sense of 
whatever we are. I am not going to repeat what we 
studied earlier, since we have not much time and we 
are to cover the entire study in a few days. 
“Whatever we are” is an important sentence to be 
underlined, and we have to understand first of all what 
we are, which is another way of saying what ‘self’ 
means. We are to understand the self in every sense—
in terms of the definition of it as gaunatman, mithya-
atman, and mukhya-atman, to which we made 
reference earlier. So, our self is not merely the imagined 
location of our consciousness within the body, as it 
were, but everything that we are, even in an established 
relationship of ourself—spatially, temporally, socially 
and otherwise, together with our consciousness of this 
psychophysical organism—finally to culminate in the 
mukhya-atman or the primary Self, which is the 
universality of our essential being. 
For the purpose of meditation, a proper place is 
necessary—śucau deśe pratiṣṭhāpya sthiram āsanam 
ātmanaḥ (Gita 6.11). Śucau deśe: In a purified 
atmosphere, in a conducive environment we have to 
place ourselves comfortably in a posture for the 
purpose of this great adventure called meditation. This 
is a great spiritual worship that we are performing, an 


===== PAGE 95 / 161 =====

95 
 
ardent invocation of divinity, a soulful devotion that we 
manifest within ourselves towards the Creator of the 
Universe, and an inward communion spiritually 
established between ourselves and all that God has 
created and God Himself is. So it is a sanctified, sacred, 
worshipful attitude. It is not a mechanism that we are 
operating—it is a spirit that gets unfolded in 
meditation. 
There 
is 
an 
organic 
growth, 
an 
advancement of personality in the process of 
meditation, so that we become richer and richer, wider 
and wider, deeper and deeper, and grow well beyond in 
our spirit as we advance in meditation. The place that 
we select for our meditation should be free from 
distractions. Some more details concerning this matter 
is available in the Swetaswatara Upanishad. There 
again we are told that the location for the purpose of 
our seatedness in meditation should be conducive in 
the sense that there should be no other avenue to pull 
our attention in any other direction than the point of 
concentration we have chosen; this is an important 
point to remember. There are loves and hatreds, 
prejudices and emotional tensions to which man is heir 
and from which no one is totally free. These are 
important things that we may bear in mind. 
The process of meditation is not a struggle in the 
sense of a fighting with nature, or with what we call the 
odds of life; it is an establishment of a harmony, rather 
than a conflict with the powers that be, in which we are 
engaging ourselves. It is more an attitude of friendship 
by way of communion of feeling that meditation is, than 
an encounter with an enemy; though in the earlier 
stages all the opposing forces appear to be our 
opponents, enemies, and intruding factors. There are 


===== PAGE 96 / 161 =====

96 
 
stages by which the senses and the mind have to be 
weaned from the points of distraction, and the highest 
method should not be applied when one is in the lower 
stage of evolution. Each one has to realise where one is 
positioned in this world. There should not be any kind 
of over-estimation of one’s capacities, nor is there a 
necessity for under-estimation. It is a need for a careful 
observation of one’s self in the true perspective of the 
position or the station one occupies in this great 
scheme of evolution. This requires a knowledge of the 
vaster field of our relationship with the entire scheme 
of things, where we touch upon the whole story of 
creation—the cosmological process to which also 
reference has already been made. When we touch the 
point of meditation, we are actually coming in contact 
with every sleeping dog in the whole universe—they 
will slowly wake up and become conscious of our 
adventure, our activity and our intentions. 
In the lowest stages, such as the one in which we are 
at present—the purely social, political, and physical—
the forces of nature do not actually make themselves 
felt in our relationship to them. We are so self-centred, 
physically and socially, etc., that the wider involvement 
of ours in the larger scheme of things does not become 
an object of our awareness, usually. But any act of 
concentration, a pointed attention of consciousness, 
stirs the atmosphere in a particular manner and this 
stimulation, communicated to the whole environment 
of ours by the effort of our consciousness in meditation, 
rouses into action certain powers whose existence itself 
might not be known to us earlier. These are the 
oppositions we feel when we actually enter into the 
process of meditation in right earnest. In the beginning 


===== PAGE 97 / 161 =====

97 
 
nothing may seem to happen. For days and months, and 
even years, it may appear that our meditation is not 
yielding any result at all, and we are just the same 
person that we were—but, this is not the truth. Every 
effort at concentration of consciousness is a great asset, 
and even if it be not tangible to our outer consciousness 
or our surface mind, it is there, like a little bank 
balance. Though it may not become cognisable because 
of the little quantum of it, it is nevertheless there like an 
incipient disease or a possible potentiality for a future 
development of any kind whatsoever. 
Things invisible and unfelt are not necessarily non-
existent. But, at a particular stage, when this 
concentration attains some maturity—gets fructified, 
becomes ripe—it calls, invokes or elicits the attention 
of everything in the world with which we are connected 
in 
our 
personality. 
The 
so-called 
obstacles 
in 
meditation are not inimical forces attacking us. In fact, 
there are no enemies in this universe. But, certain 
operations in the universe may look antagonistic to us 
due to our inability to reconcile ourselves to the modes 
of their working and the purpose for which they are 
operating; the defect is not in them but in ourselves. 
The forces of nature are also manifest in different 
degrees of density and, if you recall to your memories 
the earlier studies, you will realise that the forces 
around us are manifold in nature. In a way we may say 
it is a single force manifesting itself as manifold 
presentations or expressing itself in various forms. We 
are related to other people in the world. This 
relationship that is social will also evoke the sort of 
reaction in a particular manner, when we go deep into 
this technique we are adopting for awakening our spirit 


===== PAGE 98 / 161 =====

98 
 
that is asleep now. There are other associations, which 
are purely empirical, also will get stimulated by the act 
of our concentration if it is accentuated enough. 
But these are minor things compared to the more 
powerful ones—namely, the elemental forces, which 
cannot easily be roused by a little of meditation. A huge 
lion, very strong and confident of his strength, will not 
wake up even if we pelt a stone at it. Only a little puppy 
will wake up; it will bark at us even if we look at it. But 
a mighty lion or even an elephant, which knows its own 
strength, will not in any way be affected by our gazing 
at it or even with our interfering with it in a mild 
manner. So our little meditations may not even be felt 
by this mighty lion of the physical universe. It may be 
like scratching a rock with a little needle; the effect is so 
little and imperceptible that it is practically not there. 
But if it is strong enough, if we are attacking it with 
sufficient force and it is aware that it is facing a power 
almost equal to itself, then it wakes up. This is the 
waking up of the powers which constitute what we may 
call, in ordinary language, the five elements—earth, 
water, fire, air, ether. If the powers of the elements 
wake up, then we are really in a state where we have to 
reinforce our energies to effectively take up this task on 
hand. 
We are mostly in a state of irreconcilability with the 
powers of nature. The elements are not in harmony 
with the structure of our individuality. We can be 
seriously affected by physical forces—we can be 
drowned by water, burned by fire, blown by wind, and 
become destroyed by anything that is material or 
physical. Hunger and thirst, to mention only the least 
among them, are some of the consequences that follow 


===== PAGE 99 / 161 =====

99 
 
from the weakness of the physical personality in its 
relation to the five elements. These energies do not 
make themselves felt ordinarily; most of us will not feel 
this difficulty at all. For us, all is a theory only, because 
our meditation may not be so strong as to wake up the 
five elements. But, until we are able to touch the 
borderland of this novel experience where we are able 
to face the five elements and become cognisant of their 
existence as vital elements involving our own lives, 
until this state is reached, we may be said to be a little 
novice only in meditation, just a ‘kindergarten 
meditator’. But, according to great teachers of yoga 
such as Patanjali, for instance, true meditation begins 
only when we contact reality, at least in one of its 
degrees. 
The grossest manifestation of reality may be said to 
be the five elements in the cosmological process; and 
until we reach this stage of vital contact with the five 
elements, we are cut off from reality in a very 
significant manner. At present, we are out of touch with 
reality. That explains our misery in life, our sorrows, 
and our difficulties even in understanding what the 
world is made of. Scientific analysis, even logical 
approaches, will not serve any purpose finally when the 
world of five elements, or the world as such, is 
considered to be a total alien to us from the way in 
which we are encountering the world at present. To us, 
all people around us are aliens—the world is a 
foreigner, and it is an object of the senses. It is an object 
in such a way that it bears no organic connection with 
ourselves; and we study it, try to understand it, 
experiment upon it and observe it as something totally 
different from us, which is the error of pure, classical 


===== PAGE 100 / 161 =====

100 
 
approach of science. There is a vital, basic organic 
connection between ourselves and the world of nature 
which is not available to us when we live in the world 
of pure sensory operations or are cut off totally from 
this contact with reality due to our involvement in this 
extreme, externalising feature called space-time. 
Thus, when we are seated for the purpose of this 
great 
objective 
of 
human 
life—encounter 
with 
Reality—in the earlier stages we guard ourselves, as we 
put up a fence around our field when we want to grow 
a harvest, or tend a garden, or grow fruits or 
vegetables, a fencing, a protection is necessary. We put 
up a protective fencing around ourselves by means of a 
dual action on our part—namely, the withdrawal of 
consciousness from sensory contact with distracting 
objects, and, at the same time, a focusing of this 
enriched consciousness upon the chosen ideal of 
meditation, which perhaps is the essence of vairagya 
and abhyasa. 
In the process of pratyahara, the earlier or earliest 
stage of meditation, there is a need, first of all, to be 
conscious of what things there are which will distract 
your attention. What are your loves and hatreds? What 
are your inner tensions or frustrations, longings? They 
have to be dealt with very carefully, as we deal with 
wild beasts when they are tamed in a circus, or as 
carefully as a physician will diagnose a chronic illness. 
Here you should not be in a hurry; it is better to go 
slow—slow and steady wins the race. You should not 
be too anxious and emotional or enthusiastic about it. 
Every step has to be a firm step, a reinforced step, such 
that you need not have to retrace your steps due to any 
over-enthusiastic movement in this direction. You have 


===== PAGE 101 / 161 =====

101 
 
to know your strengths and you have to know your 
weaknesses also. Here you have to be your own judge, 
unless of course you have a very competent Guru who 
may be your judge. Where such a Guru is not easily 
available you have to be your own intelligent judge; and 
here you should not be, in any way, over-
compassionate in regard to your own self. You should 
be a physician of your own soul, a judge of your own 
self, and no hypocrisy is permitted where it is a 
question of your own welfare and it is not a 
demonstration before others. 
This meditational technique is not an advertisement 
in society. It is a healing process that you are trying to 
undergo inwardly for your own ultimate blessedness, 
so you are concerned here with yourself and not with 
anything else. Here is the point where you are required 
to be totally dispassionate in judging your own self. You 
should make a list of all your weaknesses also together 
with your capacities, endowments, and know where 
you stand. “This is my strength, but this is also my 
weakness.” And, so far as your strength goes—so far, so 
good. Be happy. God bless you. But as far as your 
weaknesses are concerned, they have to be got rid of 
with an intelligent psychoanalytic technique of positive 
induction of a new understanding which you have to 
receive either from your Guru or, if God has blessed you 
with enough understanding, to the strength of your 
own self. Generally your weaknesses are your desires 
which, somehow or other, seek fulfilment by hook or 
crook—by any means, fair and foul. This word ‘desire’ 
has a vast connotation. It covers a large area; it touches 
anything and everything in the world. It is a desire for 
any blessed thing.  


===== PAGE 102 / 161 =====

102 
 
Now, a philosophical analysis has to help you here in 
understanding how desires arise, why they are there, 
and what are the means and methods you have to adopt 
in checking them, rather, sublimating them, and 
transmuting them into a friendly power rather than a 
disturbing, annoying, agonising distraction. That which 
is an impediment to you psychologically, may become 
your friend. An energy that is moving outwardly in the 
direction of a distracting sense-object may get 
transmuted 
into 
your 
own 
mental 
force 
or 
consciousness force, and when this attunement takes 
place, your energy gets re-doubled. Here we have 
explained, perhaps, the sum and substance of what 
pratyahara means—the coming together of the energy 
of the senses with the concentrating activity of the 
mind. When the senses unite with the mind, you have 
achieved the process of total withdrawal, pratyahara, 
and the mind gets concentrated. 
The place of meditation therefore should be, as far 
as possible, free from nearness to those objects, 
persons, and circumstances which may draw your 
attention, either by like or dislike. So here you are free 
to choose any particular place for your meditation, 
under this given condition. A suitable time also is 
necessary—it is not that you will be able to sit for 
meditation at any time during the day; and you are 
here, again, your own judge. The mind should be 
amenable 
to 
this 
task 
of 
concentration 
of 
consciousness. It should not be repellent—it should not 
be revolting for any reason. You should not be hungry, 
you should not be annoyed, you should not have a 
commitment to be attended to a few minutes 
afterwards, you should not have to catch a train in half 


===== PAGE 103 / 161 =====

103 
 
an hour, or you should not have a court case tomorrow. 
These things are distractions; they have to be dealt with 
in their own way—and as long as they are not fulfilled 
or handled in an intelligent way, your concentration of 
mind, spiritually, will not be a success. 
Spirituality is a positive art—it is not a runaway 
attitude of consciousness. In spiritual meditation, you 
are not moving away from the problems of life, you are 
not shirking your duties, but communing yourself with 
the substance and the very causative factor of every 
problem in life, and handling these forces as a master 
rather than as a slave who runs away from difficulties. 
A spiritual seeker is not a coward—he is a scientist in 
the highest sense of the term who tries to understand 
and control the forces of nature, rather than a person 
who would like to be ignorant of their existence and 
close their eyes to them, like an ostrich. Thus the art of 
spiritual living, which culminates itself in meditation, is 
the highest positivity of approach to Reality by a human 
being who is fully integrated for this purpose in a most 
healthy manner. The time that you choose for 
meditation should, therefore, be conducive as the place 
is. I need not dilate upon this theme, because many of 
you know which time is suitable for you, for what 
reason, in what place is conducive, etc. 
The method of meditation is perhaps more 
important. Place, time and method—these three are 
especially to be taken into consideration. The 
Bhagavadgita succinctly mentions something about the 
place, time and method—the techniques to be adopted 
in concentration. The method is the way in which you 
conduct yourself, the manner in which you place 
yourself in the context of your relationship with 


===== PAGE 104 / 161 =====

104 
 
reality—firstly in its most immediate form of 
manifestation, and later on in any form of its 
expression. Usually we are seated for the purpose of 
meditation—we don’t stand up or lie down. You know 
very well why it is not possible for you to meditate by 
standing; you also know well why it is not a suitable 
posture to lie down on a bed. So, a ‘via-media’ 
technique is prescribed—to be seated, which means to 
say, to repose or posture in an asana like sukhasana, 
padmasana etc., with the spine, head and neck erect, as 
far as possible, because a crouching pose will affect the 
nervous system and consequently the movement of the 
prana, and again consequently the very activity of the 
mind itself. The atmosphere around, the body, the 
nervous system, the muscles, the mind—all are 
interconnected; they are not disassociated, isolated 
aspects. So, you have to be first of all in harmonious 
condition with your atmosphere, with society, with 
your daily routine etc., outwardly, and also in a 
harmony with your muscular system, with the 
anatomical and the physiological organisation of your 
personality, which is achieved by being seated in a 
comfortable posture, as mentioned. 
Then, of course, something is mentioned about the 
breathing process—a little of it is mentioned in the 
Bhagavadgita, and there are larger details in other yoga 
texts like Patanjali and Hatha Yoga Pradeepika, etc. As 
far as you students here are concerned, I would advise 
that you need not go deep into these technical matters 
of pranayama as it has been described in the Hatha 
Yoga Pradeepika, etc., because, for your practical 
purposes, it would be enough if you breathe normally 
by a daily practice of consistent and harmonious deep 


===== PAGE 105 / 161 =====

105 
 
inhalation and exhalation than merely breathe shallow; 
you don’t breathe deep, for various reasons. For fifteen 
minutes or twenty minutes or even half an hour in the 
morning and in the evening you may stand up, or even 
sit down, and throw your arms out by breathing deeply, 
slowly, gradually, in an open atmosphere, if possible, or 
in even your own room—opening the doors and 
windows, breathe deeply and exhale also slowly. This 
simple, non-technical procedure of gradual, deep, 
consistent, persistent inhalation and exhalation itself 
will be sufficient for you. The other technicalities like 
sukhapurvaka—holding your nostrils etc.—may not be 
necessary for you at the present moment, though they 
have their own value. 
So the asana should be a seated, consistent posture. 
If you cannot sit for a long time in one position, with a 
straight spine, etc., you can, in the beginning stages at 
least, sit near a wall which is perpendicular to the 
ground. This is a convenient position, and you will not 
feel much of an ache in the back because of your 
leaning on the wall; but it should be perpendicular, not 
slanting. And then this breathing process gradually, 
together with the recitation of OM, pranava, if possible 
with a mild sonorous sound by which systematic, 
harmonious, calm process of chanting of OM. You will 
create within yourself a vibration which you will 
yourself feel as a creeping ant through your nerves. As 
if a mild electric shock is given to you, you’ll feel a 
sensation through the entire body when you chant OM 
without any kind of occupation in your mind but with a 
feeling of devotion to the great ideal before you. This 
chanting of OM may done every day, for fifteen minutes, 
before your concentration on the object. 


===== PAGE 106 / 161 =====

106 
 
Then, the crucial point comes in—the nature of the 
object of meditation and the way in which you have to 
adjust your consciousness to that location and 
structure of the object of meditation. Here you are face 
to face with a problem. The earlier stages may look 
simpler—asana, pranayama and pratyahara even may 
be regarded in any way, the outer court of yoga. When 
you come to meditation proper, you are in the inner 
court. Here, initiation is necessary; mere book reading 
may not be insufficient. Whatever may be your study, 
however vast it be, that may not be sufficient because 
here you are facing a difficulty which cannot easily be 
explained in textbooks. You may study the biology, the 
anatomy of a lion, but you will not be able to face it 
though you are a master of anatomy. You know what 
the lion is made of, its psychology also is known to you 
if you have studied a lot about it, but you cannot go 
near it, in spite of all your knowledge of how its body is 
made and how it thinks etc. So, likewise, any amount of 
academic knowledge here may not be adequate to the 
purpose. A professorial understanding is one thing, and 
a practical ability to handle the situation is a different 
thing altogether; like rowing a boat even—you may 
know the art theoretically, but you cannot row the boat 
in the water. 
So, here comes the necessity for a spiritual initiation 
by a competent Guru. Any amount of study is not 
sufficient; and you have to be very honest here, and 
don’t merely pat yourself, imagining that you can stand 
on your own legs. That is not possible, because you will 
face such difficulties that you will not even be able to 
understand them. The initiation process is not merely a 
teaching which you receive from your Guru, but it is 


===== PAGE 107 / 161 =====

107 
 
something more. The Guru does not merely give a 
lecture to you when he initiates you; he also infuses 
into you an energy of his own will. This is something 
very important to note; there is a difference between a 
Guru initiating a disciple and a professor lecturing in a 
college—there is no connection whatsoever. You are 
not merely receiving some information from the 
Guru—you are receiving something deeper, vital and 
living; and here the will of the Guru may be said to be 
operating in your own will, and, in a very important 
sense, the Guru thinks through a disciple. Sometimes 
this process is called shaktipatha—the descent of 
Guru’s power into the personality of the disciple. Any 
amount of teaching verbally was not enough for Arjuna. 
There was a higher need felt later on, and you know 
what happened and what Sri Krishna had to do. 
The art of meditation is the final touch you give to 
the whole process of spiritual practice. Which object 
are you going to concentrate upon? Normally, this 
object is chosen for you by the Guru. Are you going to 
meditate on God when you are here for meditation? No 
one can conceive God—ordinarily. But I may remove 
this fear from your mind by giving you a lesser and 
easier definition of God, for practical purposes. 
Whatever God be as He is Himself, whatever the 
Absolute be as It is in Itself, that need not deter you 
from embarking upon this fruitful art of meditation. 
Actually, for the purpose of yoga which is a 
psychological technique, the object of concentration—
which you may consider as your God, of course—is a 
thing outside which nothing has to be, can be, or ever is. 
God is something outside which nothing exists—this is 
a simpler definition of God. You know the story in the 


===== PAGE 108 / 161 =====

108 
 
Mahabharata, in the Adi Parva, wherein there is 
described 
the 
tournament 
which 
Dronacharya 
conducted for testing the students—the Kauravas and 
the Pandavas—and he hung a little wooden bird on the 
branch of a tree and he asked these boys to shoot the 
eye of the bird. He asked everyone, “Look, what do you 
see?” Someone said, “I am seeing a tree with many 
branches, and a bird kept there with a dot on its eye, of 
blackish colour. The acharya said, “You’re unfit, get out! 
You are seeing so many things.” And another said, “I am 
seeing the bird tied on a branch and also I see the black 
spot.” “No good, get out!” he said, “You are seeing so 
many things.” Then another he stood up and said, “I am 
seeing the bird.” “Oh, no good, go!” It was Arjuna who 
said, “I am seeing nothing, only the spot; I am seeing 
only the black spot. I see nothing else,” he said. “Here 
you are, start. Go ahead, attack!” he said. So, the 
concentration of the mind of Arjuna was so intense that 
his consciousness got united with that particular spot 
of concentration and he was not aware even of the bird, 
let alone the branches and the tree and the many 
people around. 
Now, for the purpose of your spiritual meditation, 
the God of your meditation is ‘that something’ which is 
the whole reality for you. Remember this here again: a 
God for you is that which is the entire reality—it is a 
total substance. It is that which includes everything that 
you want in this world. This is, again, an emotional 
aspect which you are to infuse into this object, because 
you cannot concentrate on an object which you cannot 
love emotionally. Again I mention to you this is not a 
machine that you are operating, but an organising of 
your own total being that is surging forth in the 


===== PAGE 109 / 161 =====

109 
 
direction of the object, and not merely an object. It is a 
soul-filled ideal. A compilation of whatever is desirable 
in this world will have to be seen in that object. This 
object, whatever be that object, is my God, whom I have 
chosen for the purpose of my meditation; it is not 
merely something among many other things that I have 
taken. When you love a thing whole-heartedly, it is not 
any more one thing among many things—it is the only 
thing. Intense lovers see the total reality in their 
objects, and no other objects exist there—that only 
exists, and you die for it. Unless the whole of reality is 
concentrated in that object, you cannot concentrate on 
it, you cannot love it—so love and concentration go 
together. You cannot concentrate on a thing for which 
there you have no love; and it is not a mere ordinary 
love. It is a love where the passion of the spirit gets 
roused to such an extent that it is inundated by itself 
and it sees itself wholly in the object. 
So, the object of your meditation should have a 
double characteristic. One: outside which nothing can 
be, nothing has to be—it is the only thing before you. 
Secondly: it is the object of your emotional satisfaction. 
“I love it, and I cannot love anything else. It is the 
dearest object for me. I will die for it.” And all lovers die 
for their objects, because they see the total reality there 
and nothing else exists for them. This is your God. Now, 
a psychologically conceived totality of reality becomes 
a necessity in the earlier stages, though the ontological 
reality is far off from you. As these subjects will be dealt 
with by our Professor Yavdekar, I don’t touch upon 
these things. There is a distinction between ontological 
reality and psychologically-conceived infinite, which 


===== PAGE 110 / 161 =====

110 
 
also is an essentiality in the earlier stages, for the 
purpose of spiritual meditation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 111 / 161 =====

111 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
CREATION AND LIFE AFTER DEATH 
The Bhagavadgita is a moksha-shastra, a scripture on 
the science of the liberation of the spirit. Thus it follows 
the course of the return process along the same lines as 
the evolutionary process of the descent of the soul from 
the Supreme Being. The first six chapters may be said to 
be engaged in an exposition of self-discipline from the 
individual point of view, the integration of the human 
personality and the preparation of the whole man for 
the greater task which is yet to come—namely, the at-
one-ment of the individual with the set-up of the 
universe. Some of the interpreters and commentators 
on the Bhagavadgita hold that the first six chapters 
have a relevance to the significance of the term ‘twam’ 
in the famous Upanishadic passage—tat twam asi. The 
next six chapters pertain to the characteristic of ‘tat’, or 
That, and the last six chapters are confined to the 
exposition of the process of the union of the two, 
signified by the term ‘asi’, That Thou Art. Thou That 
Are, to put it another way—twam tat asi. So this twam 
is in the first six chapters, tat in the next six, and asi in 
the last six. This is one of the opinions held by certain 
interpreters 
like 
Madhusudana 
Saraswati 
and 
commentators of that category. However, there seems 
to be some point in this opinion that the first six 
chapters are concerned with the discipline of the 
person, which culminates in the art of concentration, 


===== PAGE 112 / 161 =====

112 
 
meditation—dhyana-yoga, which is the theme of the 
sixth chapter. 
Now, if we can remember again the scheme of the 
entire process of the descent of the evolutes in the 
cosmological process from the higher realities, we 
would realise that this individuality, this personality, 
this so-called ‘I-consciousness’ of ours is a phenomenal 
appearance. The individual essence itself may not be 
phenomenal, but what we call the principle of 
individuality—characteristics which go to constitute 
the isolated individuality of ours—these externalising 
features are phenomenal in their nature because it is 
not true that the individual is totally cut off from the 
universe. This will be clear and obvious to us if we 
know how we came from the higher regions. So, the 
study of cosmology is the background and the rock-
bottom, as it were, of any kind of study in philosophy, 
and 
certain 
modern 
thinkers 
have 
held 
that 
metaphysics is a critique of cosmologies. This is 
something very interesting, and without knowledge of 
the cosmological process it will be difficult for us to 
know where we are standing today. From the position 
we are occupying at this moment, we have to ascend 
further, gradually, through the stages by which we have 
come from the highest status—the Supreme Being. The 
Bhagavadgita, from the seventh chapter onwards, right 
up to the eleventh or the twelfth, occupies itself with 
this grand subject: the theme of the constitution of the 
whole universe and its relationship to the creator, 
Ishvara, Paramatman, Purushottama—the Supreme 
Being as the director of the whole of creation. 
Yesterday, we concluded our studies with a little 
mention of the five elements, which are the grossest 


===== PAGE 113 / 161 =====

113 
 
manifestations of the cosmical substance, by a 
permutation 
and 
combination 
of 
whose 
inner 
constitutions the individuals are formed—organic or 
inorganic. Now, the very commencement of the seventh 
chapter touches upon this principle of the five 
elements, which are the visible forms of the inner 
constitution of the universe as it is visible to our eyes. 
Bhūmir āpo’nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca, 
ahaṁkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā (Gita 7.4): 
The outer cloak as it were, of the Creator, is this 
physical universe, eminently organised by the presence 
of the Supreme Being. 
Here we have a very important task to perform, 
because now we are entering into certain processes of 
practice which are more difficult than the ones we 
passed through earlier during the course of the first six 
chapters. The discipline of the first six chapters is 
difficult enough. It is not easy for a person to pass 
through this course of the first six chapters of 
discipline, culminating in the art of meditation as 
described in the sixth chapter. Now, the greater 
difficulty is before us—our relationship to the universe 
as a whole, our association with this cosmos and the 
relevance that obtains between us and God Himself. 
This is a frightening theme for unprepared minds and 
persons uneducated in the art of thinking profoundly in 
this manner, because the world persists in being 
recognised as an external object due to the force by 
which the senses work, and most of the theories of 
knowledge—these 
processes 
of 
the 
science 
of 
epistemology, as they are called—stand on the 
hypothesis that the world is outside and the whole 
perceptional process becomes meaningful only if the 


===== PAGE 114 / 161 =====

114 
 
object is somehow outside the knowing subject. A sort 
of outsideness of the object is necessary for seeing any 
meaning at all in the process of perception or 
visualisation of the object of the senses. The knowledge 
of the world is the knowledge of the object of the 
senses. So in all perception which would be considered 
as purely empirical in its character, the world is taken 
for granted as something totally outside us, and to 
establish any kind of meaningful relationship with that 
which is entirely outside us would appear to be a futile 
endeavour, because that which is totally outside us 
bears no connection with us. We cannot even know that 
the world exists if it is wholly outside. 
So the Vedanta epistemology, especially, goes 
deeper into the implications of the very process of 
perception. The knowledge of the world is not such a 
simple process—it is not so innocent as it appears on 
the surface. We do not just jump into the world and see 
that it is there; there is some complicated implication 
behind and underneath this outer association of our 
personality through the senses with the objects of the 
world, the world as a whole. It is not true that the world 
is really outside us. The five elements are not objects in 
such a way as to be totally disassociated from even our 
sense organs. A little inkling of this suggestion was 
given to us in the third chapter of the Gita when we 
were 
told: 
Gunah 
guneshu 
vartante. 
The 
very 
characteristic of the senses as an impulsion towards 
contact with objects is indicative of there being a 
common feature between themselves and the objects 
outside, and it was made clear to us that the perception 
of the world by the senses, or rather, the contact of the 
senses with the objects outside, is a colliding of the 


===== PAGE 115 / 161 =====

115 
 
gunas of prakriti with the gunas of prakriti. The sattva-
rajas-tamas combination, which is the constituent 
assembly of the individual, comes in contact with its 
own expanse in the form of a so-called world presented 
outside. Na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā divi deveṣu vā punaḥ, 
sattvaṁ prakṛtijair muktaṁ yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ 
(Gita 18.40): Nothing in the world, nothing in the 
individual, nothing in heaven and earth can be outside 
the purview and operation of these three gunas of 
prakriti. Not even heaven is outside the operation of 
these gunas. The heaven of Indra, or all the planes of 
existence, even up to Satya-loka—whatever is in this 
physical world, whatever is in you and me and 
everywhere—all these things are the permutation and 
combination of these building bricks of the cosmos: 
sattva, rajas, tamas. Thus the perception of the world, 
the knowledge we have of an external object is a very 
interesting phenomenon taking place of which we, as 
individuals, do not have a complete picture before our 
mind’s eye. The world beholds itself, as it were, in all 
processes of perception, and it is not ‘A’ or ‘B’ looking at 
a ‘C’ outside, unconnected with it. The world is not a ‘C’ 
outside ‘A’ or ‘B’ as an individual. So, in the process of 
the practise of yoga in its higher reaches, especially 
from the beginning of the seventh chapter, we are 
performing a Hanuman’s feat of leaping across this 
ocean of the large expanse of the cosmos and 
recognising the basic fraternity that is there already, 
from time immemorial, between ourselves as subjects 
and the whole cosmos, the world outside, as an object 
of ours. 
I will bring our minds back to the earlier stages of 
our studies, lest we may forget them. We began with 


===== PAGE 116 / 161 =====

116 
 
the first chapter where we are confronting the social 
atmosphere of the Mahabharata, and it was all a chaotic 
presentation before the distracted mind of Arjuna, due 
to which he was disarmed completely, psychologically, 
and he found himself in a social chaos and an 
unintelligible relationship between himself and his kith 
and kin and society in general. This problem had to be 
tackled by the Samkhya mentioned in the second 
chapter and explained further in the third chapter. A 
right 
understanding 
of 
the 
nature 
of 
human 
relationship was essential, and it became necessary 
further on to know the nature of one’s own personality 
also. Thus, the social relationships got integrated with 
the existence of the individual whose coming together 
may be said to constitute a society. 
Then we come to the harder task of relating the 
individual itself with its original, from where it has 
come—the cosmos. This is a third step, as it were, we 
are taking, and a more difficult step because the subject 
of epistemology is a crucial theme in all philosophical 
studies, and it is an essential introduction to all further 
studies in the philosophical fields. It is a very difficult 
theme and much has been said and written about it—
still people are saying and writing about it, without 
coming to a final conclusion as to how we come in 
contact with the world at all, and how we know that 
anything is there at all. Even today we are not able to 
come to a final conclusion about it because the 
doctrines of philosophy vary from each other for 
obvious reasons, and we are still at loggerheads as far 
as finals are concerned. 
However, it has to be accepted finally that, from the 
point of view of at least the implications of the 


===== PAGE 117 / 161 =====

117 
 
possibility of knowing anything at all, the knowledge 
process should imply, suggest and include a kind of 
kinship between us and that which is known by us. The 
Bhagavadgita is explicit in this matter. There is nothing 
outside this Supreme, Creative Principle: Mattaḥ 
parataraṁ nānyat kiñcid asti (Gita 7.7); ahaṁ kṛtsnasya 
jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā (Gita 7.6). These 
magnificent proclamations may sometimes go above 
our heads; we cannot understand how this could be—
how God could be everywhere. Man’s mind is weak and 
is not endowed with that much strength as to enable it 
know how God could be everywhere and, yet, we also 
could be there at the same time to know that God is 
there. 
How 
could 
God 
be 
an 
object 
of 
our 
consciousness, of our perception? How could the world 
be there at all as something that we know through our 
senses? This difficulty has been obviated by the 
Samkhya doctrine mentioned in earlier chapters, and 
now we are going deeper into a vital connection that 
we have, as souls rather than as bodies, with the vitality 
of the whole creation. 
In the beginning, at the commencement of this 
seventh chapter almost, we are not introduced into the 
principle of God or Creator very much, though it is 
mentioned here and there in a scattered manner. A 
vista of a larger expanse of the universe is opened up 
before our eyes, wider than our individuality and even 
our social relations, and we are merely told that God 
created the world. The principle of creation, or the 
hypothesis of God creating the world, keeps us in a 
position of awe, wonder, and our devotion to God as the 
creator of the universe is sometimes called, in certain 
fields of theology, aisvarya-pradhana-bhakti—devotion 


===== PAGE 118 / 161 =====

118 
 
charged with the spirit of awe, wonder and majesty as 
we would look upon a judge of the Supreme Court or a 
monarch ruling an empire, who is far above us in 
power, knowledge, and in every respect. The concept of 
God in religions, at least in the earlier stages, seems to 
involve a sense of awe and a distance between us and 
God. This distance is maintained in the seventh chapter, 
though the distance gets diminished and narrowed 
down, as it were, as we go further and further in the 
eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh chapters, until we 
reach the eleventh where the narrowness gets 
abolished completely in the commingling of us with the 
All-Being. The seventh chapter therefore introduces the 
principle of the Creator, who is not mentioned at all in 
the earlier chapters up to the sixth, because the first six 
chapters seem to be confined to the discipline of the 
individual which is very essential for even knowing 
something about there being such a thing as Creator 
himself, or God. 
Now we are introduced into the cosmological 
principle of creation and the Creator, which theme was 
essential in the earlier stages of mere discipline of the 
personality which culminated in dhyana, in the sixth 
chapter. God Is! And when we are passing through a 
mere disciplinary process, such things need not be told 
us. When we are in the earlier stages of our schooling, 
we do not even know who is ruling our country, we do 
not know that there is a government at all, because we 
need not be concerned with such things which are 
beyond our heads and which do not constitute part and 
parcel of our education in the earlier stages. Later on, 
we begin to study geography and history and political 
science, civics, and then we come to know something 


===== PAGE 119 / 161 =====

119 
 
more about the environment and the ruling powers, 
and so on. So in the first six chapters we are in a 
preparatory stage, and so we were not introduced into 
that higher area which is cosmology, theology, and so 
on—to which we are now introduced, from the 
beginning of the seventh chapter. But there is 
something higher than these five elements. Apareyam 
itas tvanyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām, jīvabhūtāṁ 
(Gita 7.5): There is a subtle organising power behind 
the physical elements. The universe is not dead; it is not 
constituted of inanimate matter as it may be told us in 
the earlier stages of our study. There is nothing dead 
and insentient in this cosmos. Everything is vibrant 
with energy, everything is moving, everything is 
flowing, everything is living. In some form or other, in 
some incipient potentiality of consciousness, it 
manifests living characteristics. The Soul of the 
Universe vibrates through even the minutest atom and 
the electron, which perhaps explains the purposiveness 
that we recognise in the movement of even the littlest 
of things in the world. There is a teleological movement 
of everything in the world, there is a purpose in 
everything—it is not a dead mechanism that operates, 
though that appears to be our interpretation of things 
from purely a spatio-temporal point of view. Thus, the 
existence of God becomes a necessary postulate in 
earlier stages—a hypothesis, you may say—to explain 
the purposefulness in creation and the nature of the 
very evolutionary process of the cosmos. 
These things raise doubts in our mind. Arjuna had 
difficulties; he was startled by these enunciations. (I 
mentioned to you, I’m passing through these chapters 
very very briefly, partly because we have very little 


===== PAGE 120 / 161 =====

120 
 
time, partly because already I have gone through these 
chapters in greater detail, in a different session whose 
themes you can study in a printed form.) These 
mentions made in the seventh chapter raise questions 
of a cosmological nature: What is the universe? What is 
the world? What is the soul? What is God? What is 
creation? When we are told that we are there, the 
cosmos, the universe is there, we are related to it some 
way, organically, and the universe is created by God, 
many cosmological questions arise in the mind—kiṁ 
tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ kiṁ karma puruṣottama, 
adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam adhidaivaṁ kim ucyate 
(Gita 8.1)—and so on and so forth. Adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ 
ko’tra (Gita 8.2)—Questions of this type are raised.  
There is an indubitable existence of ourselves; there 
is the individual existence of ours:  
• I am there, you are there, there and we are many 
people here in this world. 
• There is this world outside. 
• There is a Creator of this world. 
• There is a relationship between this Creator and this 
world. 
• There is a relationship between you and the world. 
• There is a relationship between you and the Creator. 
• And, number 7, number 8. Many other involved 
questions arise concerning the mutual relations of 
these categories mentioned: the Supreme Creator, 
the universe created, the individual, including 
human society, and the mutual relationship among 
them. 
This is the commencement of the eighth chapter, 
which concludes with a short enunciation, a narration 


===== PAGE 121 / 161 =====

121 
 
of the life beyond this world, studies which are 
comprehended in what is called eschatology—life after 
death. The world is involved in a cosmical relationship, 
as you and I are. These terms are differently explained 
by 
different 
interpreters 
and 
students 
of 
the 
Bhagavadgita. There is no uniformity among the 
understanders 
of 
these 
terms. 
Brahma, 
karma, 
adhiyajna, 
adhibhuta, 
adhidaiva, 
adhyatma 
are 
intriguing terms into which we can read any meaning 
from our philosophical, predilection point of view. And 
if we read different commentators, they will tell 
different things to us—all of which may be right in their 
own way, and yet there are more things to be said 
about them than perhaps are available in existing 
commentaries. 
There 
is 
an 
interrelationship 
of 
everything. The world is a structure of interrelated 
constituents. Everything is connected to everything 
else. In this sense we may say that everything is 
everywhere. 
A very homely and easily intelligible analogy that I 
may 
place 
before 
you 
to 
understand 
this 
interconnectedness is the organism of our own 
personality, the sarira, which is the illustration given by 
such theologists and philosophers like Sri Ramanuja. 
God is sariri, and the whole creation is sarira. The 
relationship between the universe and God is sarira-
sariri-sambandha. What is the relationship between the 
body and the soul? There is some sort of a very clear, 
intelligible relationship between the body and the soul, 
though we may not identify one with the other. The 
body is not the soul, but we cannot keep the body here 
and the soul there; they are so much related that even 
the word ‘relation’ is a poor word to describe what sort 


===== PAGE 122 / 161 =====

122 
 
of association is there between the soul and the body. 
They are one, as it were, yet they are not one. A kind of 
non-separate existence is enjoyed by the soul and the 
body, notwithstanding the fact that we cannot say that 
the one is the other. This is, perhaps, the viewpoint of 
Ramanuja—the theologians who hold that the universe 
is organically related to the Supreme Being, call Him 
Vishnu, Narayana, Brahma, Vishnu, Siva or the Supreme 
Being, or any name we would like. I do not wish to 
stretch this point too much to the breaking apotheosis 
of it, and for all practical purposes it will be enough for 
us to know that there is a non-separate relation of the 
whole of creation with God, which includes our 
relationship also. The words adhidaiva, adhyatma and 
adhibhuta are interpreted, as I mentioned, in many 
ways. In a subtle way, the Bhagavadgita itself gives the 
definition of these principles. 
Akṣaraṁ 
brahma 
paramaṁ 
(Gita 
8.3)—the 
Imperishable Eternal is the Supreme Brahman, the 
Absolute, Creator Supreme, the Infinite Eternal. This is 
Brahman, in Sanskrit language. Brahman is the total, 
all-comprehensive Absolute-Being, aksharam, and it is 
imperishable—svabhavo’dhyaatmanuchyate. 
Here, 
interpreters differ from one another in what they mean 
by the terms ‘svabhava’ and ‘adhyatma’. Adhyatma is 
the pryatyak chetana or the internal consciousness, the 
subjective awareness we may say, literally understood. 
Svabhava is natural disposition. The natural disposition 
of a being is the adhyatma or the subjectivity of that 
being. I am giving you a non-committal definition 
without going into the details of it because you can read 
any meaning into them according to your theological 
standpoints, or rather, philosophical predispositions. 


===== PAGE 123 / 161 =====

123 
 
Or more properly, to make it more clear to you as 
novitiates in this study, we may say that adhyatma is 
the 
individualised 
consciousness—consciousness 
locked up in the individuality of the person, which is 
the determinant of our svabhava, and which decides 
our svadharma also. Our duty as svadharma will be 
decided by our svabhava, or our essential nature as 
adhyatma, the individual principle in a particular 
location in the scheme or stage of evolution, a point to 
be underlined. 
Bhūtabhāvodbhavakaro visargaḥ karmasaṁjñitaḥ 
(Gita 8.3)—karma is understood to be action, 
Everybody knows what this word means—action. 
Karma, karma, karma—it is understood in a thousand 
ways. “Oh, it is my karma,” people say when they wail, 
weep over something, by which they mean their fate, or 
rather, more properly, the effect of what they did in the 
past, or what they do, what they have done, and so on. 
But more profound thinkers have understood by this 
word ‘karma’ here in this context—visarga, or the very 
process of the emanation of things from the Supreme 
Being. Visarga karmasamjnitah—the cosmic action, the 
original, universal impulse to diversify and project itself 
into this multiplicity of creation, this original creative 
will, as it were, may be said to be the visarga, the 
coming out of beings that is the karma, the original 
yajna, the first action. This is one interpretation, and I 
am not trying to go into the other interpretations which 
may not be necessary for us—bhūtabhāvodbhavakaro 
visargaḥ karmasaṁjñitaḥ. Adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ 
(8.4): All the perishable forms in creation are the 
kshara. Kshara means perishable, transient, passing. 
Adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ puruṣaś cādhidaivatam. Here 


===== PAGE 124 / 161 =====

124 
 
again there are varieties of understanding of the 
meaning 
of 
this 
statement. 
Adhidaiva 
is 
the 
superintending principle, the divinity transcending the 
subject-object relationship, the consciousness that is 
the connecting link between us and the world outside, 
the seer and the seen. These are all very difficult things 
to understand and will not be grasped merely by a 
single utterance of them. However, let them be told at 
least once so that a vibration may be produced for 
further studies. This is perhaps the most knotty point in 
the Bhagavadgita as far as the cosmology of it is 
concerned. 
Bhūtabhāvodbhavakaro visargaḥ karmasaṁjñitaḥ, 
adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ puruṣaś cādhidaivatam 
adhiyajñoham evātra. Here again we have a difficulty in 
understanding what adhiyajna is. Sometimes it is held 
that the whole field of performance in any manner 
whatsoever is adhiyajna—the divinity presiding over, 
superintending 
over, 
transcending, 
controlling, 
deciding, determining and judging. All activity in the 
universe is God as adhiyajna, the Supreme Being who 
receives the fruits of all our actions. This whole world is 
the field of activity. It is dharmakshetra-kurukshetra, 
and this field of action is the field of the performance of 
duty—svadharma. 
It 
is, 
therefore, 
a 
field 
of 
performance of sacrifice, yajna, and therefore it is holy 
land, the whole creation, this cosmos, this universe, this 
world, this society, this area which we are occupying is 
a sacred, sanctified dharmakshetra cosmically, where 
we perform our devout worship to the Almighty in the 
form of our duties, functions—whatever they be, 
whatever the shape they take. These are very difficult 
things to understand, but very essential, so that a 


===== PAGE 125 / 161 =====

125 
 
correct understanding of the mutual relationship of 
these principles among themselves will give us a 
strength to face the world and provide us with that 
internal inner energy by which we can direct our soul-
consciousness in the direction of the object of our 
meditation. We are thrilled, enthused, stirred and 
stimulated by these descriptions because we know we 
are a cosmical citizen. We are not a man or woman 
living in a corner somewhere, in some state of India—
we are a citizen of the whole of creation. We have, 
therefore, the support of the angels in heaven and the 
gods everywhere and the Supreme Being Himself. Thus, 
meditation becomes a cosmic activity. Yoga is a 
universal performance on our part, and this is the 
message of solace that the Bhagavadgita gives us. 
Now, the Bhagavadgita still keeps God away from us 
a little bit, and does not want us to jump into God 
immediately, though much has been said about our 
relationship to creation and the existence of God as the 
Supreme Creator. There is a necessity felt by us to 
understand what happens to us after we quit this body. 
“Well, I understand what you say. Here I am, here in 
this vast world, this universe, and the Great God is 
there as the Creator. Yes, perfectly okay; but when I 
leave this world, what happens to me?” This is the 
subject of eschatology—the life after death subject. 
“When a person dies, what happens?” This was the 
question of Nachiketas as we have it recorded there in 
the Kathopanishad. What happens when we quit this 
world? When the soul leaves this body, where does it 
go? 
Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante 
kalevaram, taṁ tam evaiti (Gita 8.6). Here is a 


===== PAGE 126 / 161 =====

126 
 
psychology of the transition of the soul from this body 
to another realm. Whatever be the determining force 
behind the psychic operation in us, especially at the 
time of the passing, that would decide our future. 
Precisely stated, whatever we deeply think at the time 
of passing will decide where we go and what we will be. 
Now, this may raise a question in our minds. “I must 
think some noble thoughts at the time of death so that I 
may go to some higher region, if not God Himself. So, I 
must have a holy thought in my mind, but I am not 
going to die today—everybody knows this. I will not die 
today, maybe after many, many years—so, there is time 
enough.” Here is a terrible delusion in our minds. 
Nobody will ever believe that today is the last day—it 
cannot be for obvious reasons. There are forms of logic 
which substantiate this view that it is not today 
definitely; it is not tomorrow either, and not the day 
after tomorrow. “These are frightening things, don’t tell 
me all these things. Oh! The day after tomorrow, 
horror! It is after many, many years, thirty, forty, fifty 
years. So the last thought, if it is going to determine my 
future, I shall look after it afterwards; now, let me live 
any kind of life.” This is a delusion. The last thought is 
not an isolated link, but the fruit of the tree of the whole 
life that we have led in this world. We cannot have 
apples from thistles, so if we have sown seeds of 
thistles, we know what will come out of it. Therefore do 
not be under the impression that the holy God-thought 
will come at the end when we have lived a life of 
abandon, distraction, deceit, and so on. 
The last thought is the cumulative outcome of the 
total force exerted by us throughout our life upon our 
mind. So it is not the last thought in a chronological 


===== PAGE 127 / 161 =====

127 
 
sense; it is only a ‘logical last’, not the ‘historical last’—
we have to understand this very clearly. So, do not be 
under the impression that death is very far, and the last 
thought shall be taken care of after some time. It is not 
so. Whatever we have sown will decide what we will 
reap, and therefore the thoughts, the feelings, the 
preponderating impulses in us throughout our life will 
be the determining conditions of our last feeling, last 
thought. This last thought is not merely a psychological 
operation; it is a surge of our total being. The nerves 
will crack, the muscles will melt, as it were, we will feel 
as if the bones are breaking and the whole of us will 
rush out of this body. It is not merely shallow thinking 
as we think that the tree is outside us. This kind of 
thought is not the thought that will be there at the time 
of death. It is a shattering of the whole structure of the 
individuality and a wrenching of oneself with such 
force that the last thought is not a thought at all in the 
ordinary psychological sense; it is a surge of whatever 
we are, and an inundation of our whole being with the 
cumulative completed form of our whole accumulated 
ascent throughout our life. We cannot imagine what 
will happen to us at the time of passing, when the 
whole of us quits this body. They say, sometimes, it is 
like 72,000 scorpions stinging at one stroke. This is a 
frightening illustration given by old grandmothers, 
touching upon the fact that there are so many nerve 
currents in our body—not 72,000, even much more. 
Every one will crack, and if we break one nerve we 
know what happens to us—we feel it and then know 
the pain of it—and when 72,000 nerves break, we will 
know what it means. Such a pain will be felt by the 
departing spirit because of the attachment which we 


===== PAGE 128 / 161 =====

128 
 
have to the body, through every cell of our body. We are 
wholly involved in this body, we have become the body; 
we are the body itself. Don’t be afraid of this! Perhaps 
we are all more blessed—Swami Sivananda’s grace is 
there! And God will be more merciful, such a cracking of 
the nerves will not take place. We will happily go to the 
Supreme Being. Be happy! 
So, now, the question of the predicament of the soul 
after death is taken up towards the end of the eighth 
chapter, briefly. I will touch upon it in another session. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 129 / 161 =====

129 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
THE MAJESTY OF GOD-CONSCIOUSNESS 
From self-discipline, the Bhagavadgita now takes us 
to the level of God-Consciousness as its discourse 
proceeds, and especially in the ninth, tenth and 
eleventh chapters we reach the climax of the 
description of this state. Here we seem to find God 
taking possession of everything. Human individuality 
and human responsibility do not anymore stand as an 
outside principle when God begins to rule His kingdom. 
The kingdom of the jiva, the individual, is no more an 
isolated factor requiring separate attention on the part 
of the individual. As we noted in earlier stages in the 
preceding chapters, the Gita concentrated itself upon 
the training which the individual has to undergo, until 
there is a complete preparation of oneself for the final 
onslaught, which is the great yoga of union with the 
whole cosmos. 
We were discussing the other day the implications 
of the teaching in the eighth chapter. The whole 
universe is envisaged in various facets as adhideva, 
adhibhuta, 
adhyatma, 
adhiyajna 
etc., 
all 
which 
somehow maintain the position of a transcendent 
reality. Akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ (8.3) —the super-
cosmic aspect of the Creator is subtly maintained and 
the facets of the universe, the adhibhuta, adhyatma and 
the like mentioned, also seem to give a suggestion that 
there is a graduated relationship of the individual to all 


===== PAGE 130 / 161 =====

130 
 
these cosmical levels—which, incidentally, also hinges 
upon the question of the life of the soul after death. 
The peregrination of the individual consciousness 
through the various stages, which were touched upon 
in our scheme of cosmological studies, is an interesting 
part of philosophical studies. Briefly it was told us that 
the last thought decides the future, and I mentioned 
that the last thought is not an isolated link but a 
culmination, a fruit, a maturity, the finality of the total 
psychological operations of the individual throughout 
one’ s life. So it is not a chronologically disassociated 
last thought, but a logical development of the entire 
thought process, fructifying in this total thought. We 
can describe it only in that way—the total thought, and 
not one among the many thoughts. This complete 
thought would be the factor that determines the future 
of the soul. Whatever one aspires for, that one shall 
attain to. Yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante 
kalevaram, taṁ tam evaiti (Gita 8.6). This is a great 
theme in the studies of the field of psychology, 
including abnormal psychology, we may say. The soul is 
supposed to depart from this world, shedding this 
body, and move in certain directions towards the 
destination where its unfulfilled longings can find 
fulfilment and fructification. The law which governs the 
universe seems to be so precise, mathematical, and 
exact in its functions that it does not ignore anyone—it 
does not set aside the longing of even a single 
psychological operation. Every thought has to fulfil 
itself—if not today, at least tomorrow. So there is an 
automatic action taking place in this computer system 
of the cosmos, and there is no need for another 
operator behind it. It is self-operating. And this system 


===== PAGE 131 / 161 =====

131 
 
seems to be so exact and inexorable that preference 
seems to be given to the strongest of thoughts and 
feelings, and the lesser ones receive attention later on, 
at the proper time and in the proper place. 
The Bhagavadgita does not go into great details in 
this subject, as much as we have in the Upanishads, for 
instance. There is a brief statement of the exit of the 
soul. ‘The departure of the soul from the body,’ is the 
way we describe things generally, as if we are encaged 
in this body and we are not this body. As a person may 
leave his house, we, the real individuals lodged in this 
tabernacle, leave it one day in order that we may enter 
a new house which is already constructed for us by the 
architect who is paid for by God Himself; and already 
the house is built, the foundation is dug and the entire 
structure is complete even before we leave this body. 
Such wondrous mechanism operates in the universe. 
But where do we go?—is a crucial question. “Where 
do I go, and where does anything go?” We will not be 
taken to that place which we have not desired in our 
mind, or rather which does not follow as a natural 
consequence of our thoughts, feelings and actions. The 
Bhagavadgita will tell us at another place that the 
consequences of our deeds are not entirely in our 
hands. And the deed so-called is not merely what we do 
with our hands and feet, but also what we think and 
feel and will; all these are actions, perhaps they are real 
actions. Our deep-seated longings are our actions, more 
than what our feet do or hands do. And many times our 
longings are different from the shape taken by our 
physical activities. Social conditions and many other 
factors prevent inward longings from manifesting 
themselves in outward form, and we live a repressed 


===== PAGE 132 / 161 =====

132 
 
life. But this repression is something like burying a seed 
in the ground, which will sprout itself forth one day 
when there is rainfall and a conducive atmosphere is 
manifest. 
Anything can happen to the soul after death. One 
can be reborn into this world, one can rise to a higher 
level, a higher region or superior plane of existence, 
and if we are to follow the trend of the thought given to 
us in the Upanishad, one can go to heaven and hell also. 
One can go to Brahmaloka, one can move along the 
Uttaramarga or Dakshinamarga, the Aksharadipatha—
the path of light, or the path of smoke—as the 
Bhagavadgita puts it. We need not go into minor details 
of these eschatological studies. The point that we may 
bear in mind is that we have to be very cautious in 
thinking, feeling, and willing. We should not be fools 
when we start thinking through our minds, under the 
impression that we are masters in this world. No 
individual can be a supreme master here, because of 
the very fact of a different type of relationship that 
seems to obtain between ourselves and the whole 
creation into which we had a peep when we studied the 
cosmological processes. But, however, we are given a 
solacing message in the end—“Whoever contemplates 
the Supreme Being, God Himself, that soul will enter 
God.” There is no need of exit—that soul, which is in 
permanent communion with the Supreme Master of the 
Universe, the Sovereign of the Cosmos, the Absolute, 
Parabrahma, Ishvar—that consciousness which is in 
union by yoga with the Eternal Reality will melt into the 
ocean of existence, here and now. Atra brahma 
samaśnute (Katha 2.3.14); na tasya prāṇā utkrāmanti 
(Brihad. 4.4.6): There is no movement of the prana in 


===== PAGE 133 / 161 =====

133 
 
any external direction to such a soul, and there is no 
Uttaramarga, Dakshinamarga or any kind of marga—it 
is a dissolution of the drop in the ocean, there itself, at 
the very location of it. Such a liberation is called sadyo-
mukti—instantaneous liberation. 
Otherwise there is a progressive salvation, a 
graduated ascent through the paths which are 
described in the Bhagavadgita and the Upanishads. But 
God is more than all these things that have been told us. 
The power of God and the jurisdiction of God’s 
operation is so vast that everything that we have said 
up to this time seems to pale into almost an airy 
nothing before the glory, the resplendence, the majesty 
and omnipresence of the Almighty. Nothing is there 
outside God, nothing is superior to God, nothing 
external. The absoluteness of the Infinite Being, who no 
more remains as an extra-cosmic creator but is an 
immanent reality, is the theme of the chapters to come, 
so that we seem to be in a more friendly, parental 
relation with God than a judicial relation or a very 
distant, remote, unreachable relation with God. 
In the earlier stages it appears that God is far 
away—infinite is the distance between us and God. 
Often there is doubt whether it is possible for us at all 
to come in contact with Him. But this doubt is dispelled 
when the religious consciousness deepens, and it 
realises that the very being of God is the being of 
infinitude, eternity, and therefore there is no distance 
between the soul and God. He is not an unreachable 
potentate—the monarch ruling in high heavens, but an 
immediate presence, such that His presence is 
inseparable from our deepest self, and His language is 
spoken by our own inner conscience. The language of 


===== PAGE 134 / 161 =====

134 
 
the Eternal is the voice of our conscience, and our 
Atman is Brahman. 
The ninth chapter reveals before us the majesty of 
this deepened religious consciousness. In the earlier 
stages of religion it appears that the world is ruled by 
powers—divinities, angels, masters, adepts who are 
hidden behind the forms and the things of the world. 
There are many divinities, and every form has a divinity 
which ensouls that particular body. There is an extreme 
externality of these divine presences in the widespread 
expanse of the universe before us—this is the outer 
reach of the religious consciousness. When we go 
deeper in our studies and experiences in religion, there 
is felt an inwardisation of this concept. The presence of 
these divine powers in the far-fetched distance of the 
cosmos seems also to be in harmony with the deepest 
essences of all the jivas, individuals, so that that which 
is present in distant space has also to be present 
immediately in the heart of even the thinker himself. 
Thus the so-called thing-in-itself, which is incapable of 
contact by phenomenal means, seems to be at the back 
of the very person who thinks so. Thus God, the distant 
being, is also the God who is the soul of the very 
seeking spirit which feels God as a distant being. Thus 
the inwardisation leads to the universalisation of this 
concept. God is not merely a distant master, a creator of 
the universe that is far away from us, He is also not a 
secretly hidden light within an individual body, but a 
large presence which occupies all space and all time so 
that outside it nothing can be—not the universe, not 
the individual. 
Ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate, 
teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yogakṣemaṁ vahāmyaham 


===== PAGE 135 / 161 =====

135 
 
(Gita 9.22): God protects us, and the succour which we 
receive from God’s presence is an immediate 
consequence that follows from an inward union with 
Him. This verse that I quoted just now is immensely 
important in our religious studies because that 
discloses the deeper relationship that is there between 
man and God. In fact, the word ‘relationship’ is a poor 
word; there is no relationship—they are inseparables. 
Two birds perching on the same tree—say the 
Upanishads, say the Veda—these two birds are actually 
not two different birds. The higher self and the lower 
self may appear to be two birds sitting on the same tree 
no doubt, but we know very well that the higher and 
the lower are not two distinct birds. The lower is 
included in the higher, and thus the other bird does not 
stand spatially away from the bird which is the bound 
soul. But here we have only a symbology of a 
psychological and logical distinction that seems to be 
there between man and God. There is no spatial 
distance, and there is no chronological history of the 
distance. 
There is immediate action following from deep 
meditation on God—‘immediate’ is the word. Timeless 
is God’s existence, and timeless, therefore, is God’s 
action in His operation. Timeless is He because He is 
also spaceless. Hence, the grace of God is a non-spatial 
and non-temporal gift. Inasmuch as it is non-temporal, 
it is instantaneous—just here and now. There is not the 
time-gap of even a second, because there is no time in 
God. So when the soul, the seeker, the yogin, the 
aspirant, the devotee timelessly, spacelessly unites 
itself with this timeless, spaceless Being, there is a 
timeless and spaceless consequence that follows. There 


===== PAGE 136 / 161 =====

136 
 
is an immediate fulfilment of all that is essential; there 
is a flood of all that one needs. This verse has been 
understood in many ways by different types of 
understanding. God provides us with every kind of 
need and necessity—not even a thousand mothers can 
equal Him in compassion and in love for us. The 
mothers of the world are nowhere before this Supreme 
Parent, because the love that proceeds from God in 
respect of us is the love that emanates from every 
corner of the universe. It is not one person like another 
person. A mother is one person, and even if there are 
ten-thousand mothers, they are only in some place. But 
this is a single mother who works from every corner; 
every nook and cranny, every particle of creation 
responds when God speaks. Sarvā diśo balim asmai 
haranti 
(Chhand. 
2.21.4) 
says 
the 
Chhandogya 
Upanishad. The quarters of the world begin to pour 
upon us the tribute which God sends to us. A single 
thought, which is the total surrender of the whole of 
one’s personality to this God-Being, evokes a response 
which is eternal and non-spatial, and an abundance 
follows—which the mind of man cannot contain, which 
the intellect of man cannot describe, and all the 
treasuries of the world cannot find place to keep—such 
is the wealth that God can pour upon us. All the lockers 
in the universe cannot contain this treasure, if God 
pours upon us this wealth that He has, which is 
unending, unthinkable, most glorious. Can we find a 
more solacing, comforting message in any vision than 
this great verse: ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ 
paryupāsate, teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yogakṣemaṁ 
vahāmyaham: I shall provide you with a cup of tea; I 
shall give you a spoon of sugar. 


===== PAGE 137 / 161 =====

137 
 
There was a Brahmin who was a great devotee of 
the Bhagavadgita—this is a story which touched me 
deeply, and perhaps it has a great meaning. He was a 
great devotee of this verse: ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye 
janāḥ 
paryupāsate, 
teṣāṁ 
nityābhiyuktānāṁ 
yogakṣemaṁ vahāmyaham. He was so confident of the 
help that he would receive from the Almighty that he 
was carefree in life, poverty stricken though he was. 
Practically, he was living a life of begging from the 
neighbourhood. Yet he was so confident that he would 
receive what he wants because of the promise that the 
Almighty gives in this great ordinance. One day he had 
nothing to eat; second day he went starving; third day 
there was nothing to eat, children were crying, the 
mother in the house was weeping. “Is God dead, is He 
alive? What is the meaning of your sloka? Throw out 
this Bhagavadgita,” said the old mother. The poor man 
was flabbergasted, he wept, “Is this proclamation false? 
There is no truth in this statement?” Down goes the 
Bhagavadgita—he struck that verse with a nail. Those 
days, scriptures were written on a palm-leaf, not a 
printed paper like this. He struck with a nail the verse 
written on a palm-leaf, tore it up, threw it away and 
went out in disgust that no God exists. “We are dying 
and nothing comes—and yet, there is this promise.” 
The old man went; very interesting story for you to 
hear. He went weeping in the streets. The story goes 
that one boy came running with a bag of rice on his 
back and with some rations and many other things on 
his head—a large hoard—and threw it on the verandah 
of the house, but his tongue was bleeding. The mother 
of the house came out and asked, “Who are you? What 
is it that you are bringing?” “These are the rations sent 


===== PAGE 138 / 161 =====

138 
 
by your master; the father of the home has sent this—I 
will go.” “Thank you very much, but why are you 
bleeding? What happened to your tongue?” “Oh,” the 
boy said, “I was a little delayed in bring you these 
things, and your man was so angry with me that he tore 
my tongue.” “Oh, I see. What a cruel fellow! I did not 
know this.” He vanished—the boy vanished. After the 
old man came home, the lady was down upon him. 
“What happened, are you mad? You tore the tongue of 
that boy because he came a little late?” The old man 
said, “Which boy? I never sent any boy.” Then the lady 
described the whole story. The old man burst into tears, 
cried, and then told the lady, “From today, you are my 
Guru, you had darshan of Lord Krishna; I had not that 
fortune.” Who else could have brought this costly stuff, 
and this indication of the torn tongue shows that it was 
nothing but divine dispensation that so grandly 
operated. God is never unkind, He is never unjust, He is 
never cruel, He never does harm to anybody—such is 
God. 
There is some sort of message that we seem to 
receive from the meaning that we can read between the 
lines in the ninth and the tenth chapters—everywhere 
He is present, sometimes more pronounced in His 
manifestations, sometimes not so manifest. Yad yad 
vibhūtimat sattvaṁ śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā, tat tad 
evāvagaccha tvaṁ mama tejoṁ’śasaṁbhavam (Gita 
10.41): Wherever there is exaltation of any kind, 
power, knowledge, capacity, whatever it is, a super-
normal manifestation of anything in this world, it may 
be artistic capacity, literature, music, administration, 
whatever it can be—where there is a super-normal 
expression of this characteristic or endowment, know 


===== PAGE 139 / 161 =====

139 
 
thou, I am present there.” Not that He is not present 
anywhere else; this will be seen in the eleventh chapter 
that He is present even there where He is not 
pronouncedly present or markedly visible. 
We are taken gradually to giddy heights where 
God’s 
preponderance, 
superintendence 
and 
all-
inclusiveness engulfs not merely human individuality 
and the isolated existence of jivas, but absorbs all of our 
rules and regulations, predilections, studies, power and 
knowledge into His bosom, so that He stands 
unparalleled. There is no second, either above or below 
or right or left or anywhere. This is the might of God, 
and there is no one to behold this might except He 
Himself. It is the Glory of God, beheld by God only, and 
He sees Himself, He loves Himself; He is what He Is. To 
this height Arjuna’s mind has to be taken, and the 
minds of every one of us have to be led. Then we shall 
no more feel a necessity to exist as we are today. The 
love of this body, the greed after self-justification, this 
craving of the jivas will no more feel the necessity to 
receive recognition from anywhere, as a disease would 
not like to be recognised. This so-called independence 
of ours can be compared to an illness, like a carbuncle 
that 
has 
grown 
on 
the 
Universal 
All-
Comprehensiveness. Who would justify it? Who would 
like to maintain it for a long time? This is a disease, but 
as one can love one’s own disease, so one can love one’s 
own ego, this body and everything that is connected 
with it. 
Deluded man, totally oblivious to his glorious goal, 
foolish in his pursuits, regards himself as all-master in 
this world, which may carry on and continue for some 
time until God takes up his rod and tolerates it no more. 


===== PAGE 140 / 161 =====

140 
 
And there cannot be a greater evil in this world than 
self-justification. Every other evil follows from this: 
audacity, tyranny, despotism—all these follow from 
self-justification. A little bit of long rope is given by God 
Himself to every one of us, so we may live in our own 
fool’s paradise for the time being and we may rule in 
the hell that we have created here. That is okay; for 
some time, enjoy your hell. But when adharma, 
incomparable adharma which is this egotism of man, 
goes to heights, to the breaking-point, then God Himself 
cannot tolerate it anymore. He takes up His cudgels and 
there is a dissolution of the cosmos. And, when He takes 
up the reigns of rule in His Hands, the rule in the 
kingdom of individuals not only does not operate, but 
powerfully gets communed with this universal rule of 
the kingdom of the Absolute. 
All this is told to Arjuna and he weeps, “Mighty Lord, 
I cannot understand what You are speaking. I am in a 
state of consternation, my mind is not working, I do not 
know where I am standing. You are describing a glory 
in a manner which my mind, my reason, is not expected 
to contain or understand. What is this ‘might’ , this 
‘glory’ , this ‘grandeur’ , this ‘completeness’ , this 
‘absoluteness’—it is possible for me to behold this?” 
That is the question in the earlier verses of the eleventh 
chapter. “Who can behold It?” This eye which sees 
through the microscope or the telescope is not the 
instrument to see the Almighty. We have but only these 
eyes, these two eyes. They cannot see that All-being. An 
integral vision is necessary to behold this integrality of 
existence. The superficial, phenomenal eye sees 
diversity everywhere, but distinction between the seer 
and the seen is not the tool that you can employ in the 


===== PAGE 141 / 161 =====

141 
 
vision of the Absolute. So the Great Lord says, “You 
cannot behold this Being, this Mighty Form of Mine, 
with these two eyes. I shall endow you with a third 
eye.” This third eye is an integral intuition, the total 
consciousness, the whole of our being welling up into 
action—the Atman beholding Brahman. That miracle 
seems to have taken place by some magical action of 
the Almighty, and we cannot understand how it took 
place. We have only to accept it; it has been there, it is 
there, and there is nothing more to say about it. 
What did Arjuna see? Well, when we say ‘saw’ or 
‘see’, we should understand that it is not ‘seeing’ with 
these two eyes, because it is already mentioned that the 
two eyes of man, the mortal eyes, cannot behold the 
Immortal. He saw a miracle. These sentences we are 
using are inadequate to the purpose; we are using 
fragile words of mortal language for describing the 
characteristics of Immortal Existence. Like a frog in the 
well describing the ocean—this is how we are 
describing the Almighty. Whatever be our description, 
it falls short, badly, from that Mighty, Super-Nature. It is 
impossible to describe the meaning of the eleventh 
chapter. It just stands unparalleled in poetic excellence, 
and an exuberance of philosophic abundance. We have 
to read it for ourselves; our soul has to read it—not 
merely our eyes. Vyasa, the great author of the 
Bhagavadgita, goes into raptures, as it were, in giving a 
description of this rapturous experience of Arjuna, and 
poetry is the only way of expressing such miracles and 
wonders and marvels and majesties. Prose is poor—
poetry is supreme here, and the poetry in Sanskrit here 
goes to its heights. When we are in a state of rapture, 
we speak anything that we like—any word that comes 


===== PAGE 142 / 161 =====

142 
 
from us is holy at that time. It is the Divine Word that 
we speak because we are in ecstasy of Self-possession, 
God-Possession—it is a Veda that comes from our 
mouth when God possesses us and we speak at that 
moment. This great vision is difficult to have because 
God is ‘All’ and He cannot tolerate the presence of 
another ‘all’ external to Him. There cannot be two 
kingdoms of God. If we establish our own kingdom 
here, on earth, vying with the eternal kingdom of the 
Absolute, then we may rule our kingdom well in the 
way we are having here in it; but this empire of ours 
cannot reach that divine empire. 
Na vedayajñādhyayanair na dānair na ca kriyābhir 
na tapobhir ugraiḥ, evaṁrūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛloke 
draṣṭuṁ tvadanyena kurupravīra (Gita 11.48): Not 
anything that man can do or an individual is capable of, 
can be considered as adequate for this purpose. What is 
necessary is the total abnegation of oneself. God does 
not require anything from us—no prasad or sacrament. 
Nothing can be offered to God because everything 
belongs to Him. There is nothing with us because we 
possess nothing here. What can we offer to Him? 
Perhaps the last thing that we have is our own 
individuality, our egoism, our personality, our being. 
God asks that we may be offered to Him, and not 
anything that we may have. He does not want a temple 
to be built for Him, a house of brick and mortar, calling 
it a chapel or a church. He does not want any offering 
because all these offerings are not our properties. We 
are offering to Him what does not belong to us—this is 
not a charity. But what we consider as our property is 
ourself only. The last thing that we can part with, the 
dearest and the nearest of our possessions, that object 


===== PAGE 143 / 161 =====

143 
 
which we love most, it is our own self—let this love 
melt into God-love. 
Bhaktyā tvananyayā śakya aham evaṁvidho (Gita 
11.54): This bhakti, this devotion spoken of here, is not 
a little lip sympathy that we show to God. It is not a 
bowing of the head, it is not the folding of the hands or 
the striking of the cheeks—it is the melting of ourselves 
in the menstruum of God-Being. We can only speak, but 
our reason cannot grasp what all this means. 
Matkarmakṛn matparamo madbhaktaḥ saṅgavarjitaḥ, 
nirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ sa mām eti (Gita 11.55). 
Again to repeat, ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ 
paryupāsate, teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yogakṣemaṁ 
vahāmyaham. Recite this sloka every day—contemplate 
its meaning. Nobody can harm us. There is nobody who 
is not under the subjection of God’s rule, and therefore 
when we are in communion with this Great Master of 
the World, who can do harm to us? The whole army of 
God will protect us, provided we are honestly in 
fraternal relation with Him and we regard Him as All-
in-All. In a way, the response from God is proportionate 
to the response from us in respect of Him. The way in 
we envisage Him, or contemplate Him, or understand 
Him, that perhaps is the way in which He will respond. 
“As you do to Me, so I shall do to you—what you think 
of Me, that I will think of you—and what you give Me, 
that I also give you.” If we give ourselves, God will give 
Himself. God does not give any material prosperity, 
though He can give that also. But when He Himself 
gives His Own Being, why should we expect any 
material prosperity? Do we not think that God is more 
than all matter, all the wealth of all creation? But God 
will offer Himself only when we offer ourselves to 


===== PAGE 144 / 161 =====

144 
 
Him—not before. If we offer only a tidbit or tinsel, the 
response will be of the same type. 
Thus it is that the Self-offering of God is an 
automatic, instantaneous occurrence as a response to 
the whole-souled offering of ourselves to Him. Here is 
bhakti reaching its culmination, its logical completion. 
The word ‘bhakti’ is not the proper word to describe 
this condition. It is not jnana, it is not bhakti, it is not 
yoga—it is every blessed thing. When we love a thing 
with all our soul, with all our heart, with all our being, 
we do not know how to describe it in our language. It is 
not devotion, it is not affection—it is something more 
than all this. Do not use any words from language; it is 
something more. Thus is the devotion, thus is the bhakti 
that is the surrender, that is the yoga and that is what is 
expected of us here when we reach the supreme 
culmination of yoga which is the vision of the Absolute 
in the Vishvarupa. Jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena 
praveṣṭuṁ ca parantapa (Gita 11.54): To know It, to 
visualise It and to enter into It. These are the duties of 
man, finally. God-realisation is the goal of life. Union 
with God, entry into God, merging into the Absolute is 
the final goal of all things everywhere, all beings, living, 
non-living, visible, invisible. 
Thus, yoga is an art of attaining to God-
consciousness. The various types of yoga, which are the 
ways we understand for the purpose of this grand 
culmination, are described in the twelfth chapter, 
briefly, later on. 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 145 / 161 =====

145 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
THE ONE SUPREME ABSOLUTE ALONE IS  
The faculties of knowledge and action in the human 
individual correspond, practically, to the functions of 
reason, will, emotion, and the impulse to act. We 
rationally and intellectually consider the pros and cons 
of a particular step to be taken—this is the rationality 
behind our way of living. Apart from pure intellectual 
or rational assessment, there is also a faculty in us 
which goes by the name of will—volition—which 
decides and determines a course of action or a purpose 
to be fulfilled. There is also a very important 
contributory factor in all of our engagements in life, 
namely emotion or feeling, and there is also the vigour 
which impulses to act. Practically, the human being is 
exhausted by these operations: reason, will, emotion, 
and an impulsion to vibrate as activity in some 
direction or the other. 
The way of life of the human being is also the way in 
which we live a religious life. Even our practise of yoga 
and our concept of God, everything for the matter of 
that which is connected with this, has to be cast in the 
mould of these endowments. We cannot go beyond the 
limitations set by these facets of human individuality. In 
our adventures in life, we operate one or the other of 
these faculties—sometimes one preponderating over 
the others, and often, some one faculty assuming such 
an importance that it may even bury down the other 
aspects as if they do not exist at all. But we are a blend 


===== PAGE 146 / 161 =====

146 
 
of all these faculties. It is not wise to over-emphasise 
any of these, because we are a wholesome, total human 
organism; and health, whether it is physical or 
psychological, is to be considered as a balance of our 
forces—the forces which constitute us, whether they 
are physical or otherwise. 
The religious life that we live is also conditioned by 
these principles of our psyche, and though it is true that 
we should harmonise the operations of all these 
faculties 
due 
to 
certain 
inborn 
traits 
in 
us, 
characteristics into which we are born right from the 
beginning of our life, we are not capable of paying equal 
attention to all these. There is an automatic 
preponderance of one or the other of these faculties, so 
that people are either predominantly intellectual, and 
the emotions do not play such an important role in 
them, or they are pre-eminently feelingful, touchy, 
sentimental, emotional and the reason does not play an 
important part in their life. There are others who are 
terribly active, they cannot sit in one place; there is 
always a tendency to move and do something or the 
other throughout the day, whatever the reason behind 
it be, and the feeling also be. There are psychic types 
who are accustomed to concentrate, and this also 
sometimes assumes a special importance for some 
characters. It is rarely we see people with all these 
faculties in proper proportion—such an integrated 
individual is difficult to see. 
These faculties in the human being are the 
instruments of the practice of yoga, so that we cannot 
contact reality except through the apparatus with 
which we are endowed. These four features mentioned 
determine and decide our encounter with God, the 


===== PAGE 147 / 161 =====

147 
 
Supreme Being; and the way in which we visualise the 
Supreme Being through these faculties goes by the 
names of the various yogas: jnana, yoga, bhakti, karma 
and the like. In the Bhagavadgita we have a large detail 
opened up before us of all these methods of spiritual 
practice, though we cannot say that anywhere does the 
Bhagavadgita create a watertight compartment among 
these procedures or ways of approach. In every verse of 
the Gita there is a touching of everything practically, 
and there is no airtight distinction of one from the 
other. However, to be more precise and to make it more 
convenient to us, teachers of the Bhagavadgita and 
interpreters of this gospel have tried to discover 
instructions and teachings in the Bhagavadgita which 
accept the employing of these faculties for the purpose 
of religious living or spiritual practice, and particularly 
references to some of the verses from the twelfth 
chapter of the Bhagavadgita which, at least according to 
certain careful interpreters like the great Madhusudana 
Saraswati, seem to take into consideration these four 
yogas, so-called, which adopt the techniques of reason, 
will, emotion and action. 
Mayyeva mana ādhatsva mayi buddhiṃ niveśaya 
nivasiṣyasi mayyeva ata ūrdhvaṁ na saṃśayaḥ (Gita 
12.8). This is one verse in the twelfth chapter: “Absorb 
yourself in Me.” This has been understood to signify a 
communion of the soul with the Absolute. Mayi 
buddhiṃ niveśaya: “May your reason be united with My 
Being.” Our principle faculty of knowing is reason, for 
all practical purposes, and when the reason is dissolved 
in a higher reason, the individual practically is 
swallowed-up in the larger dimension of this Infinitude. 
So in this verse of the Bhagavadgita in the twelfth 


===== PAGE 148 / 161 =====

148 
 
chapter, we seem to be told the final stroke in yoga—a 
jump into the Ocean of All-Being, and a dissolution of 
one’s self in the All-Consuming Reality. But this is a 
hard job. No mortal who considers himself or herself as 
a human being can have the strength to embrace the 
ocean or the fire of God without terror for the affirming 
feature or the character of individuality. Nobody would 
like to die even for the sake of God Himself; they would 
like to live, whatever be the background of it. Dying is a 
very difficult thing. You cannot immolate yourself for 
the sake of God even. That is the last sacrifice that we 
would be prepared to do, and nothing can be more 
fearsome than that. And any argument that God is all 
things will not be adequate here. “Let God be anything, 
but I will not do this sacrifice.” Bhagavan Sri Krishna, 
the teacher of the Bhagavadgita, seems to know this 
weakness of human nature, and as a good master, a 
school master, a psychologist or a teacher, He would 
not expect the student to do what the student is not 
able to understand or do. So the teaching goes, “If this is 
not possible, you can take to repeated practise of this 
type of concentration.” This abhyasa-yoga, or repetition 
of concentration, is akin to the technique suggested to 
us in such methods as we have in the Yoga Sutras of 
Patanjali for instance. Atha cittaṁ samādhātuṁ na 
śaknoṣi mayi sthiram, abhyāsayogena tato mām 
icchāptuṁ dhanañjaya (Gita 12.9): “If you cannot so 
forcefully unite your whole being with Me, try by 
repeated practise to establish this contact Me and carry 
on this practise throughout your life.”  
Yamas, niyama, asana, pranyama, pratyahara, 
dharana, 
dhyana 
are 
the 
graduated 
techniques 
prescribed for those who cannot at one stroke attain 


===== PAGE 149 / 161 =====

149 
 
this union with the All. But we are not in a position to 
concentrate our minds even in this manner; it is very 
difficult for us. Even for a few hours of the day this type 
of concentration is hard, due to the power of the sense 
organs—the desires, the passions, the grief, the 
frustrations, and the many troubles to which a man is 
heir. Then what can be done? Abhyāse’pyasamartho’si 
matkarmaparamo bhava, madartham api karmāṇi 
kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi (Gita 12.10). Here I am trying 
to follow the reading of Madhusudana Saraswati who 
seems to be more generous in his understanding, 
because it is hard to make out the true implications of 
these statements of Bhagavan Sri Krishna. The very 
shrewd 
interpretation 
given 
by 
Madhusudana 
Saraswati is that here in this third verse the teacher 
seems to suggest that if this application of our will in 
the way of direct concentration becomes difficult for us 
for any reason, we should engage ourselves in service 
in His name—that is service of God through devotion to 
Him, maybe in the form of worship. Sravanam, 
kirtanam, visnoh smaranam, pada-sevanam, arcanam, 
vandanam, dasyam, sraksham atma-nivedanam—these 
are the ways of devotion. See God in all, serve God in 
humanity, feel His presence in everything, worship Him 
in all visible objects, mankind or otherwise. This is the 
large manifestation of the Creator in the form of this 
universe. Through the bhavas of bhakti or the various 
methods of devotion, resort to this daily practice of 
doing such things as are pleasing to Him. Madartham 
api karmāṇi kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi: All our actions 
be for My sake. That means to say, one is always 
keeping in mind the vision of the presence of God, even 
when one is performing one’s daily routine. All the 


===== PAGE 150 / 161 =====

150 
 
routines or duties of a devotee or a bhakta are 
worships of God in one way or the other, whether it is 
worship in a temple or atithi satkara in the house. 
However, the instruction in this verse and that which 
follows in the succeeding one seem to meet at one 
point, and we cannot easily demarcate the meaning 
conveyed by this third verse and the fourth one, 
because what is called karma-yoga , action performed 
as yoga, is somehow inseparable from action 
performed in the name of God. 
Abhyāse’pyasamartho’si matkarmaparamo bhava, 
madartham api karmāṇi kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi. 
Sarvakarmaphalatyāgaṁ tataḥ kuru yatātmavān (Gita 
12.11).  So this seems to be teaching on karma yoga. 
“The abandonment of the fruits of action at least may 
be your way, if everything is not possible and any other 
thing is not practical. Neither can you reason and argue 
and unite your total understanding with Me, nor can 
you find time to concentrate on My Being. You have not 
got the will, nor will you be able to feel My presence, 
love Me whole-heartedly. Then do your duty as per 
your station in society.” Our duty will depend upon our 
station in human society, or station in a particular given 
circumstance or environment. But this duty that we 
perform should be such that it does not get tagged-
down to a result that we expect to follow for our own 
personal benefit or advantage or personal satisfaction. 
We do not do something because we expect some 
pleasure out of it. The great ethical doctrine of 
Emmanuel Kant is—when some pleasure is connected 
with duty, it ceases to be duty, because duty is an 
impersonal requirement on our part and pleasure is a 
personal affair, so they cannot go together; this is what 


===== PAGE 151 / 161 =====

151 
 
the German philosopher thought. But, however, he may 
not be wholly correct in going to such a puritanic extent 
in distinguishing between satisfaction and duty, 
because 
there 
can 
be 
higher 
satisfaction—not 
necessarily a personal pleasure arising from our 
performance of duty, because the correct performance 
of duty is possible only on the basis of a higher 
understanding, 
and 
wherever 
there 
is 
right 
understanding, there is a great satisfaction. We cannot 
say that there can be only duty minus the feeling sense 
in it, though this feeling of satisfaction need not be 
connected with personality, egoism or individual 
affirmation, or selfishness of any kind. 
So, karma, bhakti, yoga, jnana—these seem to 
include every possible approach of man to God. The 
Bhagavadgita seems to have told us everything—there 
is nothing further to tell us. The theory and the practise 
of yoga, the philosophy and the application of it in life, 
is here complete for our practical purposes at least. 
There are those who imagine, think and conclude that 
the Bhagavadgita is over, here, and there is nothing 
further to be told. Some think that it is over with the 
eleventh chapter itself, because once one has had a 
vision of the Supreme Being, there is nothing further to 
be told. But this is one view, of some people—not the 
generally accepted view, because there are internal 
references in the Mahabharata itself which seem to 
suggest that the Bhagavadgita is not complete with the 
eleventh or the twelfth chapter—it goes further; and 
we may follow this tradition that the Bhagavadgita is 
not over with the eleventh or the twelfth chapters. 
Arjuna has some questions, or perhaps he has no 
questions, because the beginning of the third chapter is 


===== PAGE 152 / 161 =====

152 
 
sometimes with a query from Arjuna, sometimes 
without a query, according to different readings. The 
general reading is a direct speech from Sri Krishna 
himself, but some extraordinary editions add one extra 
verse, posing a question from Arjuna as to what prakriti 
is, purusha is, etc. However, whatever the truth of the 
matter be, it is immaterial for our purposes. There is 
some context, evidently, due to which the thirteenth 
chapter has become a necessity, and inasmuch as great 
masters like Jnaneshwar Maharaj have gone into great 
detail in their discourse on thirteenth chapter, etc., and 
we cannot set aside the views of a great master like 
Jnaneshwar Maharaj who was supposed to be a God-
realised being, it would be wise on our part not to go to 
extremes of historical analysis, and accept that there is 
a great point in the Bhagavadgita continuing from the 
thirteenth chapter onwards—for some important 
reason which we shall see. 
We have practically understood the essentials of 
religion and spirituality with this long discourse, right 
from the beginning of the Gita till this present level we 
have reached now. But the vision of the All-Being—
Vishvarupa, if it remains mainly a vision which passes, 
and it actually passed in the case of Arjuna, we have to 
conclude that he did not enter into it and dissolve 
himself there, because he was still there as an 
individual. He had a flash, he had an intuition, he saw 
with the third eye, but he did not conduct a pravesha 
into it. Jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena praveṣṭuṁ ca 
parantapa 
(Gita 
11.54)—the 
three 
words 
are 
mentioned towards the end of the eleventh chapter. He 
knew it and he saw it, but he did not enter into it, 
evidently. 


===== PAGE 153 / 161 =====

153 
 
Whatever it is, these are very hard things to 
understand. There is a persistent assertion on the part 
of every seeker that there is a universe outside. With all 
our practices and our philosophical affirmations, we 
cannot gainsay the presence of a world outside us, 
sometimes even people around. We cannot easily 
identify the objective universe with the consciousness 
that conceives it, beholds it, perceives it, comes in 
contact with it. A persistent distinction is there 
between consciousness and matter, which are called 
purusha and prakriti. The whole bodily encasement of 
the individual and the entire creational structure is 
supposed to be a conglomeration of the constituents of 
what we call prakriti—the original matter, we may say. 
Matter is more than what we sense with our gross 
organs—it is a subtle potentiality for objectivity. Even 
according to modern physics, matter is not actually the 
hard brick or the solid mango that we touch. It is 
something very unintelligible, transcending even 
conception by the mind; something which cannot be 
described even as ethereal, yet existing as a very subtle 
transcendent potentiality for manifesting externality. 
Matter is externality. The power of externality is matter 
and therefore it is something more than solidity, and 
we cannot identify it with solid objects. Somehow, 
something is there. This something which is there, and 
not here, is the so-called prakriti or the object, and the 
one cannot be identified with the other easily. But the 
verse at the very beginning of the thirteenth chapter, in 
a very subtle way, seems to solve this difficulty for us 
when it says: kṣetrajñaṁ cāpi māṃ viddhi sarvakṣetreṣu 
(Gita 13.2): “I am the Knower in all the fields which are 
known.” The multiplicity of perceivers and a real 


===== PAGE 154 / 161 =====

154 
 
external universe seem to be ruled out by the 
suggestion given here that there is a single ruling 
consciousness as a kshetrajna, which is the perceiver, 
true cogniser, knower behind all the bodies. If a body or 
a material structure is to be considered as that which is 
constituted of the five elements—earth, water, fire, air, 
and ether—and if there is a uniform kshetrajna or a 
knowing principle behind all these bodies, it is difficult 
to believe how the universe can be outside this 
consciousness.  
The Bhagavadgita accepts the Samkhya principles of 
the dualism of prakriti and purusha, with a great 
proviso that there is something beyond these two 
principles which are like the two wings of the bird of 
the Supreme Being, but the wings themselves are not 
the bird. We have a similar thought in Spinoza in the 
West, who had a notion of the Supreme Being by way of 
what we call substance, with two attributes of space 
and time. The attributes of Spinoza are something like 
the purusha and prakriti of the Samkhya according to 
the 
Mahabharata, 
the 
Manu 
Smirti 
and 
the 
Bhagavadgita—not 
Kapila’s 
or 
Ishvarakrishna’s 
Samkhya. There is a practical utility in taking for 
granted that there is such a thing called purusha and 
prakriti. Whether they are really there in the last word 
is a different matter, but they have to be taken as 
existent, like an ‘x’ in an equation; it is not there, but it 
must be there because it has utility. Human beings, who 
can think only in this manner and cannot think in any 
other way, cannot obviate their involvement in this 
concept of the duality of the seer and the seen, and we 
cannot jump over our own skin. 


===== PAGE 155 / 161 =====

155 
 
But the philosophy of the Bhagavadgita, or any 
profound philosophy for the matter of that, is a study of 
the implications of experience, and not merely a study 
of empirical experience. Empirical experience may tell 
us that there are two realities—prakriti and purusha—
but the implication is something deeper. The very 
knowledge of the fact that there are two things shows 
that there is a third thing which is other than the two 
things; otherwise, no one can know that there are two 
things. Prakriti cannot know there is purusha, purusha 
cannot know that there is prakriti, if they are totally 
different. The possibility of the one knowing the other, 
or one contacting the other, is acceptable only on the 
presence of a larger ground to which a subtle hint is 
given when the Bhagavadgita tells us, “I am the Knower 
behind all the things,”—which means to say, the 
consciousness behind the whole material universe. 
Consciousness is the Knower of the whole cosmos. 
There is a single Seer—‘The Beholder of the Universe’ 
that is God, who is brooding over the waters of 
creation. We need not go further, deeper, into the 
difficulties that we may have to face, in going a step 
beyond this conclusion that we have arrived at, because 
if we press this feature of the omnipresence of 
consciousness as immanent in all creation to its logical 
limit, we will be forced to conclude that matter does not 
exist, because consciousness can be omnipresent only if 
the so-called material object is a part and parcel of the 
existence of consciousness itself. This is to go too far, 
and we need not to such an extent at the present 
moment. 
The thirteenth chapter of the Bhagavadgita is thus: 
prakriti, purusha, viveka, kshetra, kshetrajna vibhaaga-


===== PAGE 156 / 161 =====

156 
 
yoga. This prakriti, this material—a metaphysical 
matter, we should say, not the ordinary matter of the 
carpenter, or the chemist, or the scientist as we know, 
the philosopher’s matter—this matter is not a solid 
substance, but a constituent of forces, energies. There is 
no matter outside energy. This is what our science also 
says, and the Bhagavadgita says. These energies are 
called sattva, rajas and tamas. Sattva, rajas and tamas 
are not three substances. The idea of substance attacks 
us like a hobgoblin wherever we go; and whichever we 
try to contact in any manner whatsoever, the idea of 
solidity of objects and the externality of things is so 
hardboiled in us that we cannot understand how a 
mere force, an energy, can become a solid universe. The 
solidity of a substance is not the characteristic of the 
substance itself—it is a reaction set up by the contact of 
senses. Again we go back to that famous statement in 
the third chapter of the Bhagavadgita where it is said 
that the perception of the universe is nothing but the 
coming together, in contact with each other, of the 
constituents of the individual with the constituents of 
the cosmos—the gunas of prakriti colliding with the 
gunas of prakriti, an ocean of waves, dashing against 
one another, as it were, where there neither a seer or a 
seen, no subject or object. ‘The Ocean of Being’ is 
dancing within its own bosom! 
So the prakriti so-called, the matter to which 
reference has been made in the thirteenth chapter, is 
constituted of three forces—sattva, rajas, and tamas—
which is the theme of the fourteenth chapter. The idea 
that the universe is a solid, material, brick-like 
substance is removed from our mind by the teaching 
that the whole universe is force. Here we have a 


===== PAGE 157 / 161 =====

157 
 
corresponding philosophy of German philosopher 
Leibniz—the universe is made of force—and this is also 
of modern physics. As we are told, all great men think 
alike, whether they are from the East or the West. 
When we reach the top of the mountain, we will see the 
same thing, whoever we are. So all these great men—
Plato or whoever he is, they have reached an apex of 
perception of things, so they have the same 
explanation, finally, of the internal character of things. 
We have to overcome our subjection to the gunas of 
prakriti—this is a teaching towards the end of the 
fourteenth chapter. We are caught up by these forces, 
as it were, and we cannot easily understand how we are 
so caught. The grip of these forces upon us is such that 
we have lost consciousness of the way in which this 
grip has been affected upon us. We have been totally 
brainwashed—until madness—so that we cannot know 
what has happened to us. When we are indoctrinated 
into a particular system of thinking, by hammering into 
our mind the same thought, again and again, we may 
forget our original thinking. So the world has been 
effective in driving into our minds the falsity of an 
existence of an external, material, so-called universe; 
and we are indoctrinated into it—we think only in this 
manner. Thus it is that we are in a prison-house, 
imagining that we are in heaven. The teaching has been 
so very powerful that we have accepted it wholly—that 
this prison-house is the same as the heaven supreme. 
This body is delightful—it is made of gold and silver, it 
is perfumed, it is very delightful. We decorate the body 
as if it is a deity. We look at our own face in the mirror 
as if there is nothing more beautiful than that—our 
own face is the most beautiful thing. We take care of it 


===== PAGE 158 / 161 =====

158 
 
more endearingly than our own firstborn child, but it is 
the dirtiest of things—the most awful thing, if we go 
into the structure of it. It will stink if you don’t take 
bath for a few days, it will deteriorate for other reasons, 
and we know its fate finally—such is the glory of this 
body which we are considering as a temple of our so-
called ideal. This is to say how far we have gone into 
erroneous notions about things; and even the fear of 
death is not a deterrent factor for us. We are not afraid 
of death, provided that we can taste the honey of this 
body. The Bhagavadgita goes far enough to remove this 
objection, this difficulty, this problem facing us and 
repeats again and again. There are repetitions of ideas 
many times, and these repetitions go to contribute to 
the effect they produce upon us, because a thing told 
once only is likely to be forgotten. So it is told again and 
again, hammered into our minds. 
The world appears to be there as a prakriti outside, 
but it is not really outside there. It is immanently 
controlled by a Supreme Principle—the kshetrajna, the 
Knower of all things—and even this so-called outside 
object, this prakriti, is not a solid substance. It is a sea of 
turbulent energies which attack each other with the 
force of a cyclone blowing over the surface of an ocean. 
Above these gunas of prakriti, transcendent to the 
visible structure of all this creation, beyond the 
individual seer, is the Supreme Purushottama. The 
whole universe is guided, controlled, illuminated and 
ruled by this Supreme Purushottama. God is called 
Purushottama to distinguish the supremacy of God over 
the ordinary purushas which are the individuals. While 
the jivas are called purushas, there is a Supreme 


===== PAGE 159 / 161 =====

159 
 
Purusha who is the best of all purushas—that is 
Purushottama. 
The fifteenth chapter again describes the nature of 
this universe, with a different type of emphasis—the 
subject which was touched upon in the thirteenth and 
the fourteenth chapters already. The thirteenth, 
fourteenth, 
and 
the 
fifteenth 
chapters 
concern 
themselves with cosmological themes, creation, and the 
entire series of the levels of manifestation, God’s role in 
this creation and man’s relationship to God, the 
connection with the universe, with the other principles, 
and so on. These are all in varieties of ways mentioned 
in the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth chapters. The 
fifteenth chapter has an importance of its own because 
it very poetic. It has its own majesty, and in a beautiful 
allegory it compares the whole of creation to a tree 
with its roots above and branches spread below. This 
allegory of a tree is also to be found in certain mystical 
scriptures of the West, like the Scandinavian myth of 
‘The Tree of Yggdrasil’, as it is called—they compare 
the universe to a large tree. There is some point in 
taking this as a suitable comparison in for the way in 
which universe spreads itself out, because the universe 
is 
like 
a 
spread-out, 
large 
banyan 
tree—
asvatthavraksha, the peepul—the only difference being 
its roots are above and the roots are not below, as we 
have in the case of other peepul trees here. 
Ūrdhvamūlam adhaḥśākham (Gita 15.1)—We have 
never seen a tree like that, where the tree’s roots are 
above; they are fixed to the sky as it were. 
But this is a very interesting analogy for us, for the 
purpose of meditation even. We know very well that we 
are always accustomed to this concept of the ‘above’ 


===== PAGE 160 / 161 =====

160 
 
whenever we think of the higher realities, especially the 
Creator. Don’t we look up when we pray to God? Do we 
look down on the ground? This is a symbolic inclination 
of 
the 
human 
consciousness—to 
recognise 
the 
transcendence of higher realities. And, whenever we 
speak of the sky, we look above, as if the sky is only 
above, though it is also underneath. If the sky is all 
around the earth, why should we say it is above? This 
earth is hanging in space, in mid-space—there is no 
below for the earth. But it is a notion of our mind on 
account of our inability to see the whole structure of 
this planetary system, and we cannot believe that we 
are a moving in a spaceship called this earth. We are 
not in a rocket, though it is so, perhaps, in some way. 
We are rushing, rocket-like, in some direction, but we 
think we are on the solid ground of the Earth. This habit 
of the human mind is to consider that it is on a low 
ground, and everything which is of a controlling nature 
and an administrative type, especially divine in nature 
is above because the world and everything connected 
to the world is considered as ‘effect’ which proceeds 
from a cause, and the cause being superior, is also 
transcendent. And we, like children, think that all 
transcendent things are above in a spatial way, and 
look up. But, it is above also in a logical sense. Logically, 
God is above us. To repeat what I told you earlier, He is 
above in the same way as the higher class in a school is 
above the lower class. It is not above in space—it is not 
a ‘spatial aboveness’. We don’t find the higher classes in 
a school or a college standing in the sky and the lower 
classes below—yet, we still say it is a higher class. So in 
what sense do we call it a higher class? You know very 
well—it is a ‘logical, conceptual higherness’. In that 


===== PAGE 161 / 161 =====

161 
 
sense we speak of the ‘higher self’ transcendent to the 
lower self. We conceive of the realities above the world 
as ‘above’ in a very very specific, psychic, psychological 
or philosophical sense, mystical manner. In this way, 
we have to conceive that the rootedness of the tree of 
this universe in the Transcendent Being—God the 
Creator, the Absolute, and the descending of this tree, 
and all the effects that you see here, spread out as 
branches of which we are all parts.
